It is natural to believe in great men. If the companions of our childhood should turn out to be heroes, and their condition regal, it would not surprise us. All mythology opens with demigods, and the circumstance is high and poetic; that is, their genius is paramount. In the legends of the Gautama, the first men ate the earth, and found it deliciously sweet.  Nature seems to exist for the excellent. The world is upheld by the veracity of good men: they make the earth wholesome. They who lived with them found life glad and nutritious. Life is sweet and tolerable only in our belief in such society; and actually, or ideally, we manage to live with superiors. We call our children and our lands by their names. Their names are wrought into the verbs of language, their works and effigies are in our houses, and every circumstance of the day recalls an anecdote of them.  The search after the great is the dream of youth, and the most serious occupation of manhood. We travel into foreign parts to find his works,--if possible, to get a glimpse of him. But we are put off with fortune instead. You say, the English are practical; the Germans are hospitable; in Valencia, the climate is delicious; and in the hills of Sacramento there is gold for the gathering. Yes, but I do not travel to find comfortable, rich, and hospitable people, or clear sky, or ingots that cost too much. But if there were any magnet that would point to the countries and houses where are the persons who are  intrinsically rich and powerful, I would sell all, and buy it, and put myself on the road to-day.  The race goes with us on their credit. The knowledge, that in the city is a man who invented the railroad, raises the credit of all the citizens. But enormous populations, if they be beggars, are disgusting, like moving cheese, like hills of ants, or of fleas--the more, the worse.  Our religion is the love and cherishing of these patrons. The gods of fable are the shining moments of great men. We run all our vessels into one mould. Our colossal theologies of Judaism, Christism, Buddhism, Mahometism, are the necessary and structural action of the human mind. The student of history is like a man going into a warehouse to buy cloths or carpets. He fancies he has a new article. If he go to the factory, he shall find that his new stuff still repeats the scrolls and rosettes which are found on the interior walls of the pyramids of Thebes. Our theism is the purification of the human mind. Man can paint, or make, or think nothing but man. He believes that the great material elements had their origin from his thought. And our philosophy finds one essence collected or distributed.  If now we proceed to inquire into the kinds of service we derive from others, let us be warned of the danger of modern studies, and begin low enough. We must not contend against love, or deny the substantial existence of other people. I know not what would happen to us. We have social strengths. Our affection toward others creates a sort of vantage or purchase which nothing will supply. I can do that by another which I cannot do alone. I can say to you what I cannot first say to myself. Other men are lenses through which we read our own minds. Each man seeks those of different quality from his own, and such as are good of their kind; that is, he seeks other men, and the otherest. The stronger the nature, the more it is reactive. Let us have the quality pure. A little genius let us leave alone. A main difference betwixt men is, whether they attend their own affair or not. Man is that noble endogenous plant which grows, like the palm, from within, outward. His own affair, though impossible to others, he can open with celerity and in sport. It is easy to sugar to be sweet, and to nitre to be salt. We take a great deal of pains to waylay and entrap that which of itself will fall into our hands. I count him a great man who inhabits a higher sphere of thought, into which other men rise with labor and difficulty; he has but to open his eyes to see things in a true light, and in large relations; whilst they must make painful corrections, and keep a vigilant eye on many sources of error. His service to us is of like sort. It costs a beautiful person no exertion to paint her image on our eyes; yet how splendid is that benefit! It costs no more for a wise soul to convey his quality to other men. And every one can do his best thing easiest--"_Peu de moyens, beaucoup d'effet._" He is great who is what he is from nature, and who never reminds us of others.  But he must be related to us, and our life receive from him some promise of explanation. I cannot tell what I would know; but I have observed there are persons, who, in their character and actions, answer questions which I have not skill to put. One man answers some questions which none of his contemporaries put, and is isolated. The past and passing religions and philosophies answer some other question. Certain men affect us as rich possibilities, but helpless to themselves and to their times,--the sport, perhaps, of some instinct that rules in the air;--they do not speak to our want. But the great are near: we know them at sight. They satisfy expectation, and fall into place. What is good is effective, generative; makes for itself room, food, and allies. A sound apple produces seed,--a hybrid does not. Is a man in his place, he is constructive, fertile, magnetic, inundating armies with his purpose, which is thus executed. The river makes its own shores, and each legitimate idea makes its own channels and welcome,--harvest for food, institutions for expression, weapons to fight with, and disciples to explain it. The true artist has the planet for his pedestal; the adventurer, after years of strife, has nothing broader than his own shoes.  Our common discourse respects two kinds of use of service from superior men. Direct giving is agreeable to the early belief of men; direct giving of material or metaphysical aid, as of health, eternal youth, fine senses, arts of healing, magical power, and prophecy. The boy believes there is a teacher who can sell him wisdom. Churches believe in imputed merit. But, in strictness, we are not much cognizant of direct serving. Man is endogenous, and education is his unfolding. The aid we have from others is mechanical, compared with the discoveries of nature in us. What is thus learned is delightful in the doing, and the effect remains. Right ethics are central, and go from the soul outward. Gift is contrary to the law of the universe. Serving others is serving us. I must absolve me to myself. "Mind thy affair," says the spirit:--"coxcomb, would you meddle with the skies, or with other people?" Indirect service is left. Men have a pictorial or representative quality, and serve us in the intellect. Behmen and Swedenborg saw that things were representative. Men are also representative; first, of things, and secondly, of ideas.  As plants convert the minerals into food for animals, so each man converts some raw material in nature to human use. The inventors of fire, electricity, magnetism, iron; lead, glass, linen, silk, cotton; the makers of tools; the inventor of decimal notation; the geometer; the engineer; musician,--severally make an easy way for all, through unknown and impossible confusions. Each man is, by secret liking, connected with some district of nature, whose agent and interpreter he is, as Linnaeus, of plants; Huber, of bees; Fries, of lichens; Van Mons, of pears; Dalton, of atomic forms; Euclid, of lines; Newton, of fluxions.  A man is a center for nature, running out threads of relation through everything, fluid and solid, material and elemental. The earth rolls; every clod and stone comes to the meridian; so every organ, function, acid, crystal, grain of dust, has its relation to the brain. It waits long, but its turn comes. Each plant has its parasite, and each created thing its lover and poet. Justice has already been done to steam, to iron, to wood, to coal, to loadstone, to iodine, to corn, and cotton; but how few materials are yet used by our arts! The mass of creatures and of qualities are still hid and expectant. It would seem as if each waited, like the enchanted princess in fairy tales, for a destined human deliverer. Each must be disenchanted, and walk forth to the day in human shape. In the history of discovery, the ripe and latent truth seems to have fashioned a brain for itself. A magnet must be made man, in some Gilbert, or Swedenborg, or Oersted, before the general mind can come to entertain its powers.  If we limit ourselves to the first advantages;--a sober grace adheres to the mineral and botanic kingdoms, which, in the highest moments, comes up as the charm of nature,--the glitter of the spar, the sureness of affinity, the veracity of angles. Light and darkness, heat and cold, hunger and food, sweet and sour, solid, liquid, and gas, circle us round in a wreath of pleasures, and, by their agreeable quarrel, beguile the day of life. The eye repeats every day the finest eulogy on things--"He saw that they were good." We know where to find them; and these performers are relished all the more, after a little experience of the pretending races. We are entitled, also, to higher advantages. Something is wanting to science, until it has been humanized. The table of logarithms is one thing, and its vital play, in botany, music, optics, and architecture, another. There are advancements to numbers, anatomy, architecture, astronomy, little suspected at first, when, by union with intellect and will, they ascend into the life, and re-appear in conversation, character and politics.  But this comes later. We speak now only of our acquaintance with them in their own sphere, and the way in which they seem to fascinate and draw to them some genius who occupies himself with one thing, all his life long. The possibility of interpretation lies in the identity of the observer with the observed. Each material thing has its celestial side; has its translation, through humanity, into the spiritual and necessary sphere, where it plays a part as indestructible as any other. And to these, their ends, all things continually ascend. The gases gather to the solid firmament; the chemic lump arrives at the plant, and grows; arrives at the quadruped, and walks; arrives at the man, and thinks. But also the constituency determines the vote of the representative. He is not only representative, but participant. Like can only be known by like. The reason why he knows about them is, that he is of them; he has just come out of nature, or from being a part of that thing. Animated chlorine knows of chlorine, and incarnate zinc, of zinc. Their quality makes this career; and he can variously publish their virtues, because they compose him. Man, made of the dust of the world, does not forget his origin; and all that is yet inanimate will one day speak and reason. Unpublished nature will have its whole secret told. Shall we say that quartz mountains will pulverize into innumerable Werners, Von Buchs, and Beaumonts; and the laboratory of the atmosphere holds in solution I know not what Berzeliuses and Davys?  Thus, we sit by the fire, and take hold on the poles of the earth. This quasi omnipresence supplies the imbecility of our condition. In one of those celestial days, when heaven and earth meet and adorn each other, it seems a poverty that we can only spend it once; we wish for a thousand heads, a thousand bodies, that we might celebrate its immense beauty in many ways and places. Is this fancy? Well, in good faith, we are multiplied by our proxies. How easily we adopt their labors! Every ship that comes to America got its chart from Columbus. Every novel is debtor to Homer. Every carpenter who shaves with a foreplane borrows the genius of a forgotten inventor. Life is girt all around with a zodiac of sciences, the contributions of men who have perished to add their point of light to our sky. Engineer, broker, jurist, physician, moralist, theologian, and every man, inasmuch as he has any science, is a definer and map-maker of the latitudes and longitudes of our condition. These road-makers on every hand enrich us. We must extend the area of life, and multiply our relations. We are as much gainers by finding a new property in the old earth, as by acquiring a new planet.  We are too passive in the reception of these material or semi-material aids. We must not be sacks and stomachs. To ascend one step,--we are better served through our sympathy. Activity is contagious. Looking where others look, and conversing with the same things, we catch the charm which lured them. Napoleon said, "you must not fight too often with one enemy, or you will teach him all your art of war." Talk much with any man of vigorous mind, and we acquire very fast the habit of looking at things in the same light, and, on each occurrence, we anticipate his thought.  Men are helpful through the intellect and the affections. Other help, I find a false appearance. If you affect to give me bread and fire, I perceive that I pay for it the full price, and at last it leaves me as it found me, neither better nor worse: but all mental and moral force is a positive good. It goes out from you whether you will or not, and profits me whom you never thought of. I cannot even hear of personal vigor of any kind, great power of performance, without fresh resolution. We are emulous of all that man can do. Cecil's saying of Sir Walter Raleigh, "I know that he can toil terribly," is an electric touch. So are Clarendon's portraits,--of Hampden; "who was of an industry and vigilance not to be tired out or wearied by the most laborious, and of parts not to be imposed on by the most subtle and sharp, and of a personal courage equal to his best parts"--of Falkland; "who was so severe an adorer of truth, that he could as easily have given himself leave to steal, as to dissemble." We cannot read Plutarch, without a tingling of the blood; and I accept the saying of the Chinese Mencius: "As age is the instructor of a hundred ages. When the manners of Loo are heard of, the stupid become intelligent, and the wavering, determined."  This is the moral of biography; yet it is hard for departed men to touch the quick like our own companions, whose names may not last as long. What is he whom I never think of? whilst in every solitude are those who succor our genius, and stimulate us in wonderful manners. There is a power in love to divine another's destiny better than that other can, and by heroic encouragements, hold him to his task. What has friendship so signaled as its sublime attraction to whatever virtue is in us? We will never more think cheaply of ourselves, or of life. We are piqued to some purpose, and the industry of the diggers on the railroad will not again shame us.  Under this head, too, falls that homage, very pure, as I think, which all ranks pay to the hero of the day, from Coriolanus and Gracchus, down to Pitt, Lafayette, Wellington, Webster, Lamartine. Hear the shouts in the street! The people cannot see him enough. They delight in a man. Here is a head and a trunk! What a front! What eyes! Atlantean shoulders, and the whole carriage heroic, with equal inward force to guide the great machine! This pleasure of full expression to that which, in their private experience, is usually cramped and obstructed, runs, also, much higher, and is the secret of the reader's joy in literary genius. Nothing is kept back. There is fire enough to fuse the mountain of ore. Shakspeare's principal merit may be conveyed, in saying that he, of all men, best understands the English language, and can say what he will. Yet these unchoked channels and floodgates of expression are only health or fortunate constitution. Shakspeare's name suggests other and purely intellectual benefits.  Senates and sovereigns have no compliment, with their medals, swords, and armorial coats, like the addressing to a human being thoughts out of a certain height, and presupposing his intelligence. This honor, which is possible in personal intercourse scarcely twice in a lifetime, genius perpetually pays; contented, if now and then, in a century, the proffer is accepted. The indicators of the values of matter are degraded to a sort of cooks and confectioners, on the appearance of the indicators of ideas. Genius is the naturalist or geographer of the supersensible regions, and draws on their map; and, by acquainting us with new fields of activity, cools our affection for the old. These are at once accepted as the reality, of which the world we have conversed with is the show.  We go to the gymnasium and the swimming-school to see the power and beauty of the body; there is the like pleasure, and a higher benefit, from witnessing intellectual feats of all kinds; as, feats of memory, of mathematical combination, great power of abstraction, the transmutings of the imagination, even versatility, and concentration, as these acts expose the invisible organs and members of the mind, which respond, member for member, to the parts of the body. For, we thus enter a new gymnasium, and learn to choose men by their truest marks, taught, with Plato, "to choose those who can, without aid from the eyes, or any other sense, proceed to truth and to being." Foremost among these activities, are the summersaults, spells, and resurrections, wrought by the imagination. When this wakes, a man seems to multiply ten times or a thousand times his force. It opens the delicious sense of indeterminate size, and inspires an audacious mental habit. We are as elastic as the gas of gunpowder, and a sentence in a book, or a word dropped in conversation, sets free our fancy, and instantly our heads are bathed with galaxies, and our feet tread the floor of the Pit. And this benefit is real, because we are entitled to these enlargements, and, once having passed the bounds, shall never again be quite the miserable pedants we were.  The high functions of the intellect are so allied, that some imaginative power usually appears in all eminent minds, even in arithmeticians of the first class, but especially in meditative men of an intuitive habit of thought. This class serve us, so that they have the perception of identity and the perception of reaction. The eyes of Plato, Shakespeare, Swedenborg, Goethe, never shut on either of these laws. The perception of these laws is a kind of metre of the mind. Little minds are little, through failure to see them.  Even these feasts have their surfeit. Our delight in reason degenerates into idolatry of the herald. Especially when a mind of powerful method has instructed men, we find the examples of oppression. The dominion of Aristotle, the Ptolemaic astronomy, the credit of Luther, of Bacon, of Locke,--in religion the history of hierarchies, of saints, and the sects which have taken the name of each founder, are in point. Alas! every man is such a victim. The imbecility of men is always inviting the impudence of power. It is the delight of vulgar talent to dazzle and to bind the beholder. But true genius seeks to defend us from itself. True genius will not impoverish, but will liberate, and add new senses. If a wise man should appear in our village, he would create, in those who conversed with him, a new consciousness of wealth, by opening their eyes to unobserved advantages; he would establish a sense of immovable equality, calm us with assurances that we could not be cheated; as every one would discern the checks and guaranties of condition. The rich would see their mistakes and poverty, the poor their escapes and their resources.  But nature brings all this about in due time. Rotation is her remedy. The soul is impatient of masters, and eager for change. Housekeepers say of a domestic who has been valuable, "She has lived with me long enough." We are tendencies, or rather, symptoms, and none of us complete. We touch and go, and sip the foam of many lives. Rotation is the law of nature. When nature removes a great man, people explore the horizon for a successor; but none comes and none will. His class is extinguished with him. In some other and quite different field, the next man will appear; not Jefferson, nor Franklin, but now a great salesman; then a road-contractor; then a student of fishes; then a buffalo-hunting explorer, or a semi-savage western general. Thus we make a stand against our rougher masters; but against the best there is a finer remedy. The power which they communicate is not theirs. When we are exalted by ideas, we do not owe this to Plato, but to the idea, to which, also, Plato was debtor.  I must not forget that we have a special debt to a single class. Life is a scale of degrees. Between rank and rank of our great men are wide intervals. Mankind have, in all ages, attached themselves to a few persons, who, either by the quality of that idea they embodied, or by the largeness of their reception, were entitled to the position of leaders and law-givers. These teach us the qualities of primary nature,--admit us to the constitution of things. We swim, day by day, on a river of delusions, and are effectually amused with houses and towns in the air, of which the men about us are dupes. But life is a sincerity. In lucid intervals we say, "Let there be an entrance opened for me into realities; I have worn the fool's cap too long." We will know the meaning of our economies and politics. Give us the cipher, and, if persons and things are scores of a celestial music, let us read off the strains. We have been cheated of our reason; yet there have been sane men, who enjoyed a rich and related existence. What they know, they know for us. With each new mind, a new secret of nature transpires; nor can the Bible be closed, until the last great man is born. These men correct the delirium of the animal spirits, make us considerate, and engage us to new aims and powers. The veneration of mankind selects these for the highest place. Witness the multitude of statues, pictures, and memorials which recall their genius in every city, village, house, and ship:--    "Ever their phantoms arise before us.   Our loftier brothers, but one in blood;   At bed and table they lord it o'er us,   With looks of beauty, and words of good."  How to illustrate the distinctive benefit of ideas, the service rendered by those who introduce moral truths into the general mind?--I am plagued, in all my living, with a perpetual tariff of prices. If I work in my garden, and prune an apple-tree, I am well enough entertained, and could continue indefinitely in the like occupation. But it comes to mind that a day is gone, and I have got this precious nothing done. I go to Boston or New York, and run up and down on my affairs: they are sped, but so is the day. I am vexed by the recollection of this price I have paid for a trifling advantage. I remember the _peau d'ane_, on which whoso sat should have his desire, but a piece of the skin was gone for every wish. I go to a convention of philanthropists. Do what I can, I cannot keep my eyes off the clock. But if there should appear in the company some gentle soul who knows little of persons or parties, of Carolina or Cuba, but who announces a law that disposes these particulars, and so certifies me of the equity which checkmates every false player, bankrupts every self-seeker, and apprises me of my independence on any conditions of country, or time, or human body, that man liberates me; I forget the clock.  I pass out of the sore relation to persons. I am healed of my hurts. I am made immortal by apprehending my possession of incorruptible goods. Here is great competition of rich and poor. We live in a market, where is only so much wheat, or wool, or land; and if I have so much more, every other must have so much less. I seem to have no good, without breach of good manners. Nobody is glad in the gladness of another, and our system is one of war, of an injurious superiority. Every child of the Saxon race is educated to wish to be first. It is our system; and a man comes to measure his greatness by the regrets, envies, and hatreds of his competitors. But in these new fields there is room: here are no self-esteems, no exclusions.  I admire great men of all classes, those who stand for facts, and for thoughts; I like rough and smooth "Scourges of God," and "Darlings of the human race." I like the first Caesar; and Charles V., of Spain; and Charles XII., of Sweden; Richard Plantagenet; and Bonaparte, in France. I applaud a sufficient man, an officer, equal to his office; captains, ministers, senators. I like a master standing firm on legs of iron, well-born, rich, handsome, eloquent, loaded with advantages, drawing all men by fascination into tributaries and supporters of his power. Sword and staff, or talents sword-like or staff-like, carry on the work of the world. But I find him greater, when he can abolish himself, and all heroes, by letting in this element of reason, irrespective of persons; this subtilizer, and irresistible upward force, into our thought, destroying individualism; the power so great, that the potentate is nothing. Then he is a monarch, who gives a constitution to his people; a pontiff, who preaches the equality of souls, and releases his servants from their barbarous homages; an emperor, who can spare his empire.  But I intended to specify, with a little minuteness, two or three points of service. Nature never spares the opium or nepenthe; but wherever she mars her creature with some deformity or defect, lays her poppies plentifully on the bruise, and the sufferer goes joyfully through life, ignorant of the ruin, and incapable of seeing it, though all the world point their finger at it every day. The worthless and offensive members of society, whose existence is a social pest, invariably think themselves the most ill-used people alive, and never get over their astonishment at the ingratitude and selfishness of their contemporaries. Our globe discovers its hidden virtues, not only in heroes and archangels, but in gossips and nurses. Is it not a rarecontrivance that lodged the due inertia in every creature, theconserving, resisting energy, the anger at being waked or changed?Altogether independent of the intellectual force in each, is the prideof opinion, the security that we are right. Not the feeblest grandame,not a mowing idiot, but uses what spark of perception and faculty isleft, to chuckle and triumph in his or her opinion over the absurditiesof all the rest. Difference from me is the measure of absurdity. Notone has a misgiving of being wrong. Was it not a bright thought thatmade things cohere with this bitumen, fastest of cements? But, in themidst of this chuckle of self-gratulation, some figure goes by, whichThersites too can love and admire. This is he that should marshal usthe way we were going. There is no end to his aid. Without Plato, weshould almost lose our faith in the possibility of a reasonable book.We seem to want but one, but we want one. We love to associate withheroic persons, since our receptivity is unlimited; and, with thegreat, our thoughts and manners easily become great. We are all wisein capacity, though so few in energy. There needs but one wise man ina company, and all are wise, so rapid is the contagion.Great men are thus a collyrium to clear our eyes from egotism, andenable us to see other people and their works. But there are vices andfollies incident to whole populations and ages. Men resemble theircontemporaries, even more than their progenitors. It is observed inold couples, or in persons who have been housemates for a course ofyears, that they grow alike; and, if they should live long enough, weshould not be able to know them apart. Nature abhors thesecomplaisances, which threaten to melt the world into a lump, and hastensto break up such maudlin agglutinations. The like assimilation goeson between men of one town, of one sect, of one political party; andthe ideas of the time are in the air, and infect all who breathe it.Viewed from any high point, the city of New York, yonder city of London,the western civilization, would seem a bundle of insanities. We keepeach other in countenance, and exasperate by emulation the frenzy ofthe time. The shield against the stingings of conscience, is theuniversal practice, or our contemporaries. Again; it is very easy tobe as wise and good as your companions. We learn of our contemporaries,what they know, without effort, and almost through the pores of theskin. We catch it by sympathy, or, as a wife arrives at the intellectualand moral elevations of her husband. But we stop where they stop. Veryhardly can we take another step. The great, or such as hold of nature,and transcend fashions, by their fidelity to universal ideas, aresaviors from these federal errors, and defend us from ourcontemporaries. They are the exceptions which we want, where all growsalike. A foreign greatness is the antidote for cabalism.Thus we feed on genius, and refresh ourselves from too much conversationwith our mates, and exult in the depth of nature in that direction inwhich he leads us. What indemnification is one great man for populationsof pigmies! Every mother wishes one son a genius, though all the restshould be mediocre. But a new danger appears in the excess of influenceof the great man. His attractions warp us from our place. We havebecome underlings and intellectual suicides. Ah! yonder in the horizonis our help:--other great men, new qualities, counterweights andchecks on each other. We cloy of the honey of each peculiar greatness.Every hero becomes a bore at last. Perhaps Voltaire was not bad-hearted,yet he said of the good Jesus, even, "I pray you, let me never hearthat man's name again." They cry up the virtues of GeorgeWashington,--"Damn George Washington!" is the poor Jacobin's wholespeech and confutation. But it is human nature's indispensable defense.The centripetence augments the centrifugence. We balance one man withhis opposite, and the health of the state depends on the see-saw.There is, however, a speedy limit to the use of heroes. Every geniusis defended from approach by quantities of availableness. They arevery attractive, and seem at a distance our own: but we are hinderedon all sides from approach. The more we are drawn, the more we arerepelled. There is something not solid in the good that is done forus. The best discovery the discoverer makes for himself. It hassomething unreal for his companion, until he too has substantiated it.It seems as if the Deity dressed each soul which he sends into naturein certain virtues and powers not communicable to other men, and,sending it to perform one more turn through the circle of beings, wrote"Not transferable," and "Good for this trip only," on these garmentsof the soul. There is somewhat deceptive about the intercourse ofminds. The boundaries are invisible, but they are never crossed. Thereis such good will to impart, and such good will to receive, that eachthreatens to become the other; but the law of individuality collectsits secret strength: you are you, and I am I, and so we remain.For Nature wishes every thing to remain itself; and, whilst everyindividual strives to grow and exclude, and to exclude and grow, tothe extremities of the universe, and to impose the law of its beingon every other creature, Nature steadily aims to protect each againstevery other. Each is self-defended. Nothing is more marked than thepower by which individuals are guarded from individuals, in a worldwhere every benefactor becomes so easily a malefactor, only bycontinuation of his activity into places where it is not due; wherechildren seem so much at the mercy of their foolish parents, and wherealmost all men are too social and interfering. We rightly speak of theguardian angels of children. How superior in their security frominfusions of evil persons, from vulgarity and second thought! Theyshed their own abundant beauty on the objects they behold. Therefore,they are not at the mercy of such poor educators as we adults. If wehuff and chide them, they soon come not to mind it, and get aself-reliance; and if we indulge them to folly, they learn thelimitation elsewhere.We need not fear excessive influence. A more generous trust ispermitted. Serve the great. Stick at no humiliation. Grudge no officethou canst render. Be the limb of their body, the breath of theirmouth. Compromise thy egotism. Who cares for that, so thou gain aughtwider and nobler? Never mind the taunt of Boswellism: the devotion mayeasily be greater than the wretched pride which is guarding its ownskirts. Be another: not thyself, but a Platonist; not a soul, but aChristian; not a naturalist, but a Cartesian; not a poet, but aShakspearian. In vain, the wheels of tendency will not stop, nor willall the forces of inertia, fear, or love itself, hold thee there. On,and forever onward! The microscope observes a monad or wheel-insectamong the infusories circulating in water. Presently, a dot appearson the animal, which enlarges to a slit, and it becomes two perfectanimals. The ever-proceeding detachment appears not less in all thought,and in society. Children think they cannot live without their parents.But, long before they are aware of it, the black dot has appeared, andthe detachment taken place. Any accident will now reveal to them theirindependence.But great men:--the word is injurious. Is there caste? is there fate?What becomes of the promise to virtue? The thoughtful youth lamentsthe superfoetation of nature. "Generous and handsome," he says, "isyour hero; but look at yonder poor Paddy, whose country is hiswheelbarrow; look at his whole nation of Paddies." Why are the masses,from the dawn of history down, food for knives and powder? The ideadignifies a few leaders, who have sentiment, opinion, love,self-devotion; and they make war and death sacred;--but what for thewretches whom they hire and kill? The cheapness of man is every day'stragedy. It is as real a loss that others should be low, as that weshould be low; for we must have society.Is it a reply to these suggestions, to say, society is a Pestalozzianschool; all are teachers and pupils in turn. We are equally served byreceiving and by imparting. Men who know the same things, are not longthe best company for each other. But bring to each an intelligentperson of another experience, and it is as if you let off water froma lake, by cutting a lower basin. It seems a mechanical advantage, andgreat benefit it is to each speaker, as he can now paint out his thoughtto himself. We pass very fast, in our personal moods, from dignity todependence. And if any appear never to assume the chair, but alwaysto stand and serve, it is because we do not see the company in asufficiently long period for the whole rotation of parts to come about.As to what we call the masses, and common men;--there are no commonmen. All men are at last of a size; and true art is only possible, onthe conviction that every talent has its apotheosis somewhere. Fairplay, and an open field, and freshest laurels to all who have won them!But heaven reserves an equal scope for every creature. Each is uneasyuntil he has produced his private ray unto the concave sphere, andbeheld his talent also in its last nobility and exaltation.The heroes of the hour are relatively great: of a faster growth; orthey are such, in whom, at the moment of success, a quality is ripewhich is then in request. Other days will demand other qualities. Somerays escape the common observer, and want a finely adapted eye. Askthe great man if there be none greater. His companions are; and notthe less great, but the more, that society cannot see them. Naturenever sends a great man into the planet, without confiding the secretto another soul.One gracious fact emerges from these studies,--that there is trueascension in our love. The reputations of the nineteenth century willone day be quoted to prove its barbarism. The genius of humanity isthe real subject whose biography is written in our annals. We mustinfer much, and supply many chasms in the record. The history of theuniverse is symptomatic, and life is mnemonical. No man, in all theprocession of famous men, is reason or illumination, or that essencewe were looking for; but is an exhibition, in some quarter, of newpossibilities. Could we one day complete the immense figure which theseflagrant points compose! The study of many individuals leads us to anelemental region wherein the individual is lost, or wherein all touchby their summits. Thought and feeling, that break out there, cannotbe impounded by any fence of personality. This is the key to the powerof the greatest men,--their spirit diffuses itself. A new quality ofmind travels by night and by day, in concentric circles from its origin,and publishes itself by unknown methods: the union of all minds appearsintimate: what gets admission to one, cannot be kept out of any other:the smallest acquisition of truth or of energy, in any quarter, is somuch good to the commonwealth of souls. If the disparities of talentand position vanish, when the individuals are seen in the durationwhich is necessary to complete the career of each; even more swiftlythe seeming injustice disappears, when we ascend to the central identityof all the individuals, and know that they are made of the samesubstance which ordaineth and doeth.The genius of humanity is the right point of view of history. Thequalities abide; the men who exhibit them have now more, now less, andpass away; the qualities remain on another brow. No experience is morefamiliar. Once you saw phoenixes: they are gone; the world is nottherefore disenchanted. The vessels on which you read sacred emblemsturn out to be common pottery; but the sense of the pictures is sacred,and you may still read them transferred to the walls of the world. Fora time, our teachers serve us personally, as metres or milestones ofprogress. Once they were angels of knowledge, and their figures touchedthe sky. Then we drew near, saw their means, culture, and limits; andthey yielded their places to other geniuses. Happy, if a few namesremain so high, that we have not been able to read them nearer, andage and comparison have not robbed them of a ray. But, at last, weshall cease to look in men for completeness, and shall content ourselveswith their social and delegated quality. All that respects theindividual is temporary and prospective, like the individual himself,who is ascending out of his limits, into a catholic existence. We havenever come at the true and best benefit of any genius, so long as webelieve him an original force. In the moment when he ceases to helpus as a cause, he begins to help us move as an effect. Then he appearsas an exponent of a vaster mind and will. The opaque self becomestransparent with the light of the First Cause.Yet, within the limits of human education and agency, we may say, greatmen exist that there may be greater men. The destiny of organizednature is amelioration, and who can tell its limits? It is for man totame the chaos; on every side, whilst he lives, to scatter the seedsof science and of song, that climate, corn, animals, men, may be milder,and the germs of love and benefit may be multiplied.II. PLATO; OR, THE PHILOSOPHER.Among books, Plato only is entitled to Omar's fanatical compliment tothe Koran, when he said, "Burn the libraries; for, their value is inthis book." These sentences contain the culture of nations; these arethe corner-stone of schools; these are the fountain-head of literatures.A discipline it is in logic, arithmetic, taste, symmetry, poetry,language, rhetoric, ontology, morals, or practical wisdom. There wasnever such range of speculation. Out of Plato come all things that arestill written and debated among men of thought. Great havoc makes heamong our originalities. We have reached the mountain from which allthese drift bowlders were detached. The Bible of the learned for twenty-two hundred years, every brisk young man, who says in succession finethings to each reluctant generation,--Boethius, Rabelais, Erasmus,Bruno, Locke, Rousseau, Alfieri, Coleridge,--is some reader of Plato,translating into the vernacular, wittily, his good things. Even themen of grander proportion suffer some deduction from the misfortune(shall I say?) of coming after this exhausting generalizer. St.Augustine, Copernicus, Newton, Behmen, Swedenborg, Goethe, are likewisehis debtors, and must say after him. For it is fair to credit thebroadest generalizer with all the particulars deducible from his thesis.Plato is philosophy, and philosophy, Plato,--at once the glory and theshame of mankind, since neither Saxon nor Roman have availed to addany idea to his categories. No wife, no children had he, and thethinkers of all civilized nations are his posterity, and are tingedwith his mind. How many great men Nature is incessantly sending up outof night, to be his men,--Platonists! the Alexandrians, a constellationof genius; the Elizabethans, not less; Sir Thomas More, Henry More,John Hales, John Smith, Lord Bacon, Jeremy Taylor, Ralph Cudworth,Sydenham, Thomas Taylor; Marcilius Ficinus, and Picus Mirandola.Calvinism is in his Phaedo: Christianity is in it. Mahometanism drawsall its philosophy, in its hand-book of morals, the Akhlak-y-Jalaly,from him. Mysticism finds in Plato all its texts. This citizen of atown in Greece is no villager nor patriot. An Englishman reads andsays, "how English!" a German--"how Teutonic!" an Italian--"how Romanand how Greek!" As they say that Helen of Argos had that universalbeauty that everybody felt related to her, so Plato seems, to a readerin New England, an American genius. His broad humanity transcends allsectional lines.This range of Plato instructs us what to think of the vexed questionconcerning his reputed works,--what are genuine, what spurious. It issingular that wherever we find a man higher, by a whole head, than anyof his contemporaries, it is sure to come into doubt, what are hisreal works. Thus, Homer, Plato, Raffaelle, Shakspeare. For these menmagnetize their contemporaries, so that their companions can do forthem what they can never do for themselves; and the great man doesthus live in several bodies; and write, or paint, or act, by manyhands; and after some time, it is not easy to say what is the authenticwork of the master, and what is only of his school.Plato, too, like every great man, consumed his own times. What is agreat man, but one of great affinities, who takes up into himself allarts, sciences, all knowables, as his food? He can spare nothing; hecan dispose of everything. What is not good for virtue is good forknowledge. Hence his contemporaries tax him with plagiarism. But theinventor only knows how to borrow; and society is glad to forget theinnumerable laborers who ministered to this architect, and reservesall its gratitude for him. When we are praising Plato, it seems we arepraising quotations from Solon, and Sophron, and Philolaus. Be it so.Every book is a quotation; and every house is a quotation out of allforests, and mines, and stone quarries; and every man is a quotationfrom all his ancestors. And this grasping inventor puts all nationsunder contribution.Plato absorbed the learning of his times,--Philolaus, Timaeus,Heraclitus, Parmenides, and what else; then his master, Socrates; andfinding himself still capable of a larger synthesis,--beyond all examplethen or since,--he traveled into Italy, to gain what Pythagoras hadfor him; then into Egypt, and perhaps still further east, to importthe other element, which Europe wanted, into the European mind. Thisbreadth entitles him to stand as the representative of philosophy. Hesays, in the Republic, "Such a genius as philosophers must of necessityhave, is wont but seldom, in all its parts, to meet in one man; butits different parts generally spring up in different persons." Everyman, who would do anything well, must come to it from a higher ground.A philosopher must be more than a philosopher. Plato is clothed withthe powers of a poet, stands upon the highest place of the poet, and(though I doubt he wanted the decisive gift of lyric expression) mainlyis not a poet, because he chose to use the poetic gift to an ulteriorpurpose.Great geniuses have the shortest biographies. Their cousins can tellyou nothing about them. They lived in their writings, and so theirhouse and street life was trivial and commonplace. If you would knowtheir tastes and complexions, the most admiring of their readers mostresembles them. Plato, especially, has no external biography. If hehad lover, wife, or children, we hear nothing of them. He ground themall into paint. As a good chimney burns its smoke, so a philosopherconverts the value of all his fortunes into his intellectualperformances.He was born 430 A. C., about the time of the death of Pericles; wasof patrician connection in his times and city; and is said to have hadan early inclination for war; but in his twentieth year, meeting withSocrates, was easily dissuaded from this pursuit, and remained for tenyears his scholar, until the death of Socrates. He then went to Megara;accepted the invitations of Dion and of Dionysius, to the court ofSicily; and went thither three times, though very capriciously treated.He traveled into Italy; then into Egypt, where he stayed a long time;some say three,--some say thirteen years. It is said, he went farther,into Babylonia: this is uncertain. Returning to Athens, he gave lessons,in the Academy, to those whom his fame drew thither; and died, as wehave received it, in the act of writing, at eighty-one years.But the biography of Plato is interior. We are to account for thesupreme elevation of this man, in the intellectual history of ourrace,--how it happens that, in proportion to the culture of men, theybecome his scholars; that, as our Jewish Bible has implanted itselfin the table-talk and household life of every man and woman in theEuropean and American nations, so the writings of Plato havepre-occupied every school of learning, every lover of thought, everychurch, every poet,--making it impossible to think, on certain levels,except through him. He stands between the truth and every man's mind,and has almost impressed language, and the primary forms of thought,with his name and seal. I am struck, in reading him, with the extrememodernness of his style and spirit. Here is the germ of that Europewe know so well, in its long history of arts and arms; here are allits traits, already discernible in the mind of Plato,--and in nonebefore him. It has spread itself since into a hundred histories, buthas added no new element. This perpetual modernness is the measure ofmerit, in every work of art; since the author of it was not misled byanything shortlived or local, but abode by real and abiding traits.How Plato came thus to be Europe, and philosophy, and almost literature,is the problem for us to solve.This could not have happened, without a sound, sincere, and catholicman, able to honor, at the same time, the ideal, or laws of the mind,and fate, or the order of nature. The first period of a nation, as ofan individual, is the period of unconscious strength. Children cry,scream and stamp with fury, unable to express their desires. As soonas they can speak and tell their want, and the reason of it, theybecome gentle. In adult life, whilst the perceptions are obtuse, menand women talk vehemently and superlatively, blunder and quarrel; theirmanners are full of desperation; their speech is full of oaths. Assoon as, with culture, things have cleared up a little, and they seethem no longer in lumps and masses, but accurately distributed, theydesist from that weak vehemence, and explain their meaning in detail.If the tongue had not been framed for articulation, man would stillbe a beast in the forest. The same weakness and want, on a higherplane, occurs daily in the education of ardent young men and women."Ah! you don't understand me; I have never met with any one whocomprehends me:" and they sigh and weep, write verses, and walkalone,--fault of power to express their precise meaning. In a monthor two, through the favor of their good genius, they meet some one sorelated as to assist their volcanic estate; and, good communicationbeing once established, they are thenceforward good citizens. It isever thus. The progress is to accuracy, to skill, to truth, from blindforce.There is a moment, in the history of every nation, when, proceedingout of this brute youth, the perceptive powers reach their ripeness,and have not yet become microscopic: so that man, at that instant,extends across the entire scale; and, with his feet still planted onthe immense forces of night, converses, by his eyes and brain, withsolar and stellar creation. That is the moment of adult health, theculmination of power.Such is the history of Europe, in all points; and such in philosophy.Its early records, almost perished, are of the immigrations from Asia,bringing with them the dreams of barbarians; a confusion of crudenotions of morals, and of natural philosophy, gradually subsiding,through the partial insight of single teachers.Before Pericles, came the Seven Wise Masters; and we have the beginningsof geometry, metaphysics, and ethics: then the partialists,--deducingthe origin of things from flux or water, or from air, or from fire,or from mind. All mix with these causes mythologic pictures. At last,comes Plato, the distributor, who needs no barbaric paint, or tattoo,or whooping; for he can define. He leaves with Asia the vast andsuperlative; he is the arrival of accuracy and intelligence. "He shallbe as a god to me, who can rightly divide and define."This defining is philosophy. Philosophy is the account which the humanmind gives to itself of the constitution of the world. Two cardinalfacts lie forever at the base: the one, and the two.--1. Unity, orIdentity; and, 2, Variety. We unite all things, by perceiving the lawwhich pervades them; by perceiving the superficial differences, andthe profound resemblances. But every mental act,--this very perceptionof identity or oneness, recognizes the difference of things. Onenessand otherness. It is impossible to speak, or to think, without embracingboth.The mind is urged to ask for one cause of many effects; then for thecause of that; and again the cause, diving still into the profound;self-assured that it shall arrive at an absolute and sufficient one,--aone that shall be all. "In the midst of the sun is the light, in themidst of the light is truth, and in the midst of truth is theimperishable being, "say the Vedas. All philosophy, of east and west,has the same centripetence. Urged by an opposite necessity, the mindreturns from the one, to that which is not one, but other or many;from cause to effect; and affirms the necessary existence of variety,the self-existence of both, as each is involved in the other. Thesestrictly-blended elements it is the problem of thought to separate,and to reconcile. Their existence is mutually contradictory andexclusive; and each so fast slides into the other, that we can neversay what is one, and what it is not. The Proteus is as nimble in thehighest as in the lowest grounds, when we contemplate the one, thetrue, the good,--as in the surfaces and extremities of matter.  In allnations, there are minds which incline to dwell in the conception ofthe fundamental Unity. The raptures of prayer and ecstasy of devotionlose all being in one Being. This tendency finds its highest expressionin the religious writings of the East, and chiefly, in the IndianScriptures, in the Vedas, the Bhagavat Geeta, and the Vishnu Purana.Those writings contain little else than this idea, and they rise topure and sublime strains in celebrating it.The Same, the Same! friend and foe are of one stuff; the ploughman,the plough, and the furrow, are of one stuff; and the stuff is such,and so much, that the variations of forms are unimportant. "You arefit" (says the supreme Krishna to a sage) "to apprehend that you arenot distinct from me. That which I am, thou art, and that also is thisworld, with its gods, and heroes, and mankind. Men contemplatedistinctions, because they are stupefied with ignorance." "The wordsI and mine constitute ignorance. What is the great end of all, youshall now learn from me. It is soul,--one in all bodies, pervading,uniform, perfect, preeminent over nature, exempt from birth, growth,and decay, omnipresent, made up of true knowledge, independent,unconnected with unrealities, with name, species, and the rest, intime past, present, and to come. The knowledge that this spirit, whichis essentially one, is in one's own, and in all other bodies, is thewisdom of one who knows the unity of things. As one diffusive air,passing through the perforations of a flute, is distinguished as thenotes of a scale, so the nature of the Great Spirit is single, thoughits forms be manifold, arising from the consequences of acts. When thedifference of the investing form, as that of god, or the rest, isdestroyed, there is no distinction." "The whole world is but amanifestation of Vishnu, who is identical with all things, and is tobe regarded by the wise, as not differing from, but as the same asthemselves. I neither am going nor coming; nor is my dwelling in anyone place; nor art thou, thou; nor are others, others; nor am I, I."As if he had said, "All is for the soul, and the soul is Vishnu; andanimals and stars are transient painting; and light is whitewash; anddurations are deceptive; and form is imprisonment; and heaven itselfa decoy." That which the soul seeks is resolution into being, aboveform, out of Tartarus, and out of heaven,--liberation from nature.If speculation tends thus to a terrific unity, in which all things areabsorbed, action tends directly backwards to diversity. The first isthe course of gravitation of mind; the second is the power of nature.Nature is the manifold. The unity absorbs, and melts or reduces. Natureopens and creates. These two principles reappear and interpenetrateall things, all thought; the one, the many. One is being; the other,intellect; one is necessity; the other, freedom; one, rest; the other,motion; one, power; the other, distribution; one, strength; the other,pleasure; one, consciousness; the other, definition; one, genius; theother, talent, one, earnestness; the other, knowledge; one, possession;the other, trade; one, caste; the other, culture; one king; the other,democracy; and, if we dare carry these generalizations a step higher,and name the last tendency of both, we might say, that the end of theone is escape from organization,--pure science; and the end of theother is the highest instrumentality, or use of means, or executivedeity.Each student adheres, by temperament and by habit, to the first or tothe second of these gods of the mind. By religion, he tends to unity;by intellect, or by the senses, to the many. A too rapid unification,and an excessive appliance to parts and particulars, are the twindangers of speculation.To this partiality the history of nations corresponded. The countryof unity, of immovable institutions, the seat of a philosophy delightingin abstractions, of men faithful in doctrine and in practice to theidea of a deaf, unimplorable, immense fate, is Asia; and it realizesthis fate in the social institution of caste. On the other side, thegenius of Europe is active and creative; it resists caste by culture;its philosophy was a discipline; it is a land of arts, inventions,trade, freedom. If the East loved infinity, the West delighted inboundaries.European civility is the triumph of talent, the extension of system,the sharpened understanding, adaptive skill, delight in forms, delightin manifestation, in comprehensible results. Pericles, Athens, Greece,had been working in this element with the joy of genius not yet chilledby any foresight of the detriment of an excess. They saw before themno sinister political economy; no ominous Malthus; no Paris or London;no pitiless subdivision of classes,--the doom of the pinmakers, thedoom of the weavers, of dressers, of stockingers, of carders, ofspinners, of colliers; no Ireland; no Indian caste, superinduced bythe efforts of Europe to throw it off. The understanding was in itshealth and prime. Art was in its splendid novelty. They cut thePentelican marble as if it were snow, and their perfect works inarchitecture and sculpture seemed things of course, not more difficultthan the completion of a new ship at the Medford yards, or new millsat Lowell. These things are in course, and may be taken for granted.The Roman legion, Byzantine legislation, English trade, the saloonsof Versailles, the cafes of Paris, the steam-mill, steamboat,steam-coach, may all be seen in perspective; the town-meeting, theballot-box, the newspaper and cheap press.Meantime, Plato, in Egypt, and in Eastern pilgrimages, imbibed theidea of one Deity, in which all things are absorbed. The unity of Asia,and the detail of Europe; the infinitude of the Asiatic soul, and thedefining, result-loving, machine-making, surface-seeking, opera-goingEurope,--Plato came to join, and by contact to enhance the energy ofeach. The excellence of Europe and Asia are in his brain. Metaphysicsand natural philosophy expressed the genius of Europe; he substructsthe religion of Asia, as the base.In short, a balanced soul was born, perceptive of the two elements.It is as easy to be great as to be small. The reason why we do not atonce believe in admirable souls, is because they are not in ourexperience. In actual life, they are so rare, as to be incredible;but, primarily, there is not only no presumption against them, but thestrongest presumption in favor of their appearance. But whether voiceswere heard in the sky, or not; whether his mother or his father dreamedthat the infant man-child was the son of Apollo; whether a swarm ofbees settled on his lips, or not; a man who could see two sides of athing was born. The wonderful synthesis so familiar in nature; theupper and the under side of the medal of Jove; the union ofimpossibilities, which reappears in every object; its real and itsideal power,--was now, also, transferred entire to the consciousnessof a man.The balanced soul came. If he loved abstract truth, he saved himselfby propounding the most popular of all principles, the absolute good,which rules rulers, and judges the judge. If he made transcendentaldistinctions, he fortified himself by drawing all his illustrationsfrom sources disdained by orators, and polite conversers; from maresand puppies; from pitchers and soup-ladles; from cooks and criers;the shops of potters, horse-doctors, butchers, and fishmongers. Hecannot forgive in himself a partiality, but is resolved that the twopoles of thought shall appear in his statement. His arguments and hissentences are self-poised and spherical. The two poles appear; yes,and become two hands, to grasp and appropriate their own.Every great artist has been such by synthesis. Our strength istransitional, alternating; or, shall I say, a thread of two strands.The seashore, sea seen from shore, shore seen from sea; the taste oftwo metals in contact; and our enlarged powers at the approach and atthe departure of a friend; the experience of poetic creativeness, whichis not found in staying at home, nor yet in traveling, but intransitions from one to the other, which must therefore be adroitlymanaged to present as much transitional surface as possible; thiscommand of two elements must explain the power and charm of Plato. Artexpresses the one, or the same by the different. Thought seeks to knowunity in unity; poetry to show it by variety; that is, always by anobject or symbol. Plato keeps the two vases, one of aether and one ofpigment, at his side, and invariably uses both. Things added to things,as statistics, civil history, are inventories. Things used as languageare inexhaustibly attractive. Plato turns incessantly the obverse andthe reverse of the medal of Jove.To take an example:--The physical philosophers have sketched each histheory of the world; the theory of atoms, of fire, of flux, of spirit;theories mechanical and chemical in their genius. Plato, a master ofmathematics, studious of all natural laws and causes, feels these, assecond causes, to be no theories of the world, but bare inventoriesand lists. To the study of nature he therefore prefixes the dogma,--"Letus declare the cause which led the Supreme Ordainer to produce andcompose the universe. He was good; and he who is good has no kind ofenvy. Exempt from envy, he wished that all things should be as muchas possible like himself. Whosoever, taught by wise men, shall admitthis as the prime cause of the origin and foundation of the world,will be in the truth." "All things are for the sake of the good, andit is the cause of everything beautiful." This dogma animates andimpersonates his philosophy. The synthesis which makes the characterof his mind appears in all his talents. Where there is great compassof wit, we usually find excellencies that combine easily in the livingman, but in description appear incompatible. The mind of Plato is notto be exhibited by a Chinese catalogue, but is to be apprehended byan original mind in the exercise of its original power. In him thefreest abandonment is united with the precision of a geometer. Hisdaring imagination gives him the more solid grasp of facts; as thebirds of highest flight have the strongest alar bones. His patricianpolish, his intrinsic elegance, edged by an irony so subtle that itstings and paralyzes, adorn the soundest health and strength of frame.According to the old sentence, "If Jove should descend to the earth,he would speak in the style of Plato."With this palatial air, there is, for the direct aim of several of hisworks, and running through the tenor of them all, a certain earnestness,which mounts, in the Republic, and in the Phaedo, to piety. He hasbeen charged with feigning sickness at the time of the death ofSocrates. But the anecdotes that have come down from the times attesthis manly interference before the people in his master's behalf, sinceeven the savage cry of the assembly to Plato is preserved; and theindignation towards popular government, in many of his pieces, expressesa personal exasperation. He has a probity, a native reverence forjustice and honor, and a humanity which makes him tender for thesuperstitions of the people. Add to this, he believes that poetry,prophecy, and the high insight, arc from a wisdom of which man is notmaster; that the gods never philosophize; but, by a celestial mania,these miracles are accomplished. Horsed on these winged steeds, hesweeps the dim regions, visits worlds which flesh cannot enter; he sawthe souls in pain; he hears the doom of the judge; he beholds the penalmetempsychosis; the Fates, with the rock and shears; and hears theintoxicating hum of their spindle.But his circumspection never forsook him. One would say, he had readthe inscription on the gates of Busyrane,--"Be bold;" and on the secondgate,--"Be bold, be bold and evermore be bold;" and then again hepaused well at the third gate,--"Be not too bold." His strength islike the momentum of a falling planet; and his discretion, the returnof its due and perfect curve,--so excellent is his Greek love ofboundary, and his skill in definition. In reading logarithms, one isnot more secure, than in following Plato in his flights. Nothing canbe colder than his head, when the lightnings of his imagination areplaying in the sky. He has finished his thinking, before he brings itto the reader; and he abounds in the surprises of a literary master.He has that opulence which furnishes, at every turn, the precise weaponhe needs. As the rich man wears no more garments, drives no more horses,sits in no more chambers, than the poor,--but has that one dress, orequipage, or instrument, which is fit for the hour and the need; soPlato, in his plenty, is never restricted, but has the fit word. Thereis, indeed, no weapon in all the armory of wit which he did not possessand use,--epic, analysis, mania, intuition, music, satire, and irony,down to the customary and polite. His illustrations are poetry and hisjests illustrations. Socrates' profession of obstetric art is goodphilosophy; and his finding that word "cookery," and "adulatory art,"for rhetoric, in the Gorgias, does us a substantial service still. Noorator can measure in effect with him who can give good nicknames.What moderation, and understatement, and checking his thunder in midvolley! He has good-naturedly furnished the courtier and citizen withall that can be said against the schools. "For philosophy is an elegantthing, if any one modestly meddles with it; but, if he is conversantwith it more than is becoming, it corrupts the man." He could wellafford to be generous,--he, who from the sunlike centrality and reachof his vision, had a faith without cloud. Such as his perception, washis speech: he plays with the doubt, and makes the most of it: hepaints and quibbles; and by and by comes a sentence that moves the seaand land. The admirable earnest comes not only at intervals, in theperfect yes and no of the dialogue, but in bursts of light. "I,therefore, Callicles, am persuaded by these accounts, and consider howI may exhibit my soul before the judge in a healthy condition.Wherefore, disregarding the honors that most men value, and lookingto the truth, I shall endeavor in reality to live as virtuously as Ican and, when I die, to die so. And I invite all other men, to theutmost of my power; and you, too, I in turn invite to this contest,which, I affirm, surpasses all contests here."He is a great average man one who, to the best thinking, adds aproportion and equality in his faculties, so that men see in him theirown dreams and glimpses made available, and made to pass for what theyare. A great common sense is his warrant and qualification to be theworld's interpreter. He has reason, as all the philosophic and poeticclass have: but he has, also, what they have not,--this strong solvingsense to reconcile his poetry with the appearances of the world, andbuild a bridge from the streets of cities to the Atlantis. He omitsnever this graduation, but slopes his thought, however picturesque theprecipice on one side, to an access from the plain. He never writesin ecstasy, or catches us up into poetic rapture.Plato apprehended the cardinal facts. He could prostrate himself onthe earth, and cover his eyes, whilst he adorned that which cannot benumbered, or gauged, or known, or named: that of which everything canbe affirmed and denied: that "which is entity and nonentity." He calledit super-essential. He even stood ready, as in the Parmenides, todemonstrate that it was so,--that this Being exceeded the limits ofintellect. No man ever more fully acknowledged the Ineffable. Havingpaid his homage, as for the human race, to the Illimitable, he thenstood erect, and for the human race affirmed, "And yet things areknowable!"--that is, the Asia in his mind was first heartilyhonored,--the ocean of love and power, before form, before will, beforeknowledge, the Same, the Good, the One; and now, refreshed and empoweredby this worship, the instinct of Europe, namely, culture, returns; andhe cries, Yet things are knowable! They are knowable, because, beingfrom one, things correspond. There is a scale: and the correspondenceof heaven to earth, of matter to mind, of the part to the whole, isour guide. As there is a science of stars, called astronomy; a scienceof quantities called mathematics; a science of qualities, calledchemistry; so there is a science of sciences,--I call itDialectic,--which is the intellect discriminating the false and thetrue. It rests on the observation of identity and diversity; for, tojudge, is to unite to an object the notion which belongs to it. Thesciences, even the best,--mathematics, and astronomy, are likesportsmen, who seize whatever prey offers, even without being able tomake any use of them. Dialectic must teach the use of them. "This isof that rank that no intellectual man will enter on any study for itsown sake, but only with a view to advance himself in that one solescience which embraces all.""The essence or peculiarity of man is to comprehend the whole; or thatwhich in the diversity of sensations, can be comprised under a rationalunity." "The soul which has never perceived the truth, cannot passinto the human form." I announce to men the intellect. I announce thegood of being interpenetrated by the mind that made nature: thisbenefit, namely, that it can understand nature, which it made andmaketh. Nature is good, but intellect is better: as the law-giver isbefore the law-receiver. I give you joy, O sons of men: that truth isaltogether wholesome; that we have hope to search out what might bethe very self of everything. The misery of man is to be balked of thesight of essence, and to be stuffed with conjecture: but the supremegood is reality; the supreme beauty is reality; and all virtue and allfelicity depend on this science of the real: for courage is nothingelse than knowledge: the fairest fortune that can befall man, is tobe guided by his daemon to that which is truly his own. This also isthe essence of justice,--to attend every one his own; nay, the notionof virtue is not to be arrived at, except through direct contemplationof the divine essence. Courage, then, for "the persuasion that we mustsearch that which we do not know, will render us, beyond comparison,better, braver, and more industrious, than if we thought it impossibleto discover what we do not know, and useless to search for it." Hesecures a position not to be commanded, by his passion for reality;valuing philosophy only as it is the pleasure of conversing with realbeing.Thus, full of the genius of Europe, he said, "Culture." He saw theinstitutions of Sparta, and recognized more genially, one would say,than any since, the hope of education. He delighted in everyaccomplishment, in every graceful and useful and truthful performance;above all, in the splendors of genius and intellectual achievement."The whole of life, O Socrates," said Glauco, "is, with the wise themeasure of hearing such discourses as these." What a price he sets onthe feats of talent, on the powers of Pericles, of Isocrates, ofParmenides! What price, above price on the talents themselves! Hecalled the several faculties, gods, in his beautiful personation. Whatvalue he gives to the art of gymnastics in education; what to geometry;what to music, what to astronomy, whose appeasing and medicinal powerhe celebrates! In the Timseus, he indicates the highest employment ofthe eyes. "By us it is asserted, that God invented and bestowed sighton us for this purpose,--that, on surveying the circles of intelligencein the heavens, we might properly employ those of our own minds, which,though disturbed when compared with the others that are uniform, arestill allied to their circulations; and that, having thus learned, andbeing naturally possessed of a correct reasoning faculty, we might,by imitating the uniform revolutions of divinity, set right our ownwanderings and blunders." And in the Republic,--"By each of thesedisciplines, a certain organ of the soul is both purified andreanimated, which is blinded and buried by studies of another kind;an organ better worth saving than ten thousand eyes, since truth isperceived by this alone."He said, Culture; but he first admitted its basis, and gave immeasurablythe first place to advantages of nature. His patrician tastes laidstress on the distinctions of birth. In the doctrine of the organiccharacter and disposition is the origin of caste. "Such as were fitto govern, into their composition the informing Deity mingled gold:into the military, silver; iron and brass for husbandmen andartificers." The East confirms itself, in all ages, in this faith. TheKoran is explicit on this point of caste. "Men have their metal, asof gold and silver. Those of you who were the worthy ones in the stateof ignorance, will be the worthy ones in the state of faith, as soonas you embrace it." Plato was not less firm. "Of the five orders ofthings, only four can be taught in the generality of men." In theRepublic, he insists on the temperaments of the youth, as the firstof the first.A happier example of the stress laid on nature, is in the dialoguewith the young Theages, who wishes to receive lessons from Socrates.Socrates declares that, if some have grown wise by associating withhim, no thanks are due to him; but, simply, whilst they were with him,they grew wise, not because of him; he pretends not to know the wayof it. "It is adverse to many, nor can those be benefited by associatingwith me, whom the Daemons oppose, so that it is not possible for meto live with these. With many, however, he does not prevent me fromconversing, who yet are not at all benefited by associating with me.Such, O Theages, is the association with me; for, if it pleases theGod, you will make great and rapid proficiency: you will not, if hedoes not please. Judge whether it is not safer to be instructed bysome one of those who have power over the benefit which they impartto men, than by me, who benefit or not, just as it may happen." As ifhe had said, "I have no system. I cannot be answerable for you. Youwill be what you must. If there is love between us, inconceivablydelicious and profitable will our intercourse be; if not, your timeis lost, and you will only annoy me. I shall seem to you stupid, andthe reputation I have, false. Quite above us, beyond the will of youor me, is this secret affinity or repulsion laid. All my good ismagnetic, and I educate, not by lessons, but by going about mybusiness."He said, Culture; he said, Nature; and he failed not to add, "Thereis also the divine." There is no thought in any mind, but it quicklytends to convert itself into a power, and organizes a hugeinstrumentality of means. Plato, lover of limits, loved the illimitable,saw the enlargement and nobility which come from truth itself, andgood itself, and attempted, as if on the part of the human intellect,once for all, to do it adequate homage,--homage fit for the immensesoul to receive, and yet homage becoming the intellect to render. Hesaid, then, "Our faculties run out into infinity, and return to usthence. We can define but a little way; but here is a fact which willnot be skipped, and which to shut our eyes upon is suicide. All thingsare in a scale; and, begin where we will, ascend and ascend. All thingsare symbolical; and what we call results are beginnings."A key to the method and completeness of Plato is his twice bisectedline. After he has illustrated the relation between the absolute goodand true, and the forms of the intelligible world, he says:--"Let therebe a line cut in two, unequal parts. Cut again each of these twoparts,--one representing the visible, the other the intelligibleworld,--and these two new sections, representing the bright part andthe dark part of these worlds, you will have, for one of the sectionsof the visible world,--images, that is, both shadows and reflections;for the other section, the objects of these images,-that is, plants,animals, and the works of art and nature. Then divide the intelligibleworld in like manner; the one section will be of opinions andhypotheses, and the other section, of truths." To these four sections,the four operations of the soul correspond,--conjecture, faith,understanding, reason. As every pool reflects the image of the sun,so every thought and thing restores us an image and creature of thesupreme Good. The universe is perforated by a million channels for hisactivity. All things mount and mount.All his thought has this ascension; in Phaedrus, teaching that "beautyis the most lovely of all things, exciting hilarity, and sheddingdesire and confidence through the universe, wherever it enters; andit enters, in some degree, into all things; but that there is another,which is as much more beautiful than beauty, as beauty is than chaos;namely, wisdom, which our wonderful organ of sight cannot reach unto,but which, could it be seen, would ravish us with its perfect reality."He has the same regard to it as the source of excellence in works ofart. "When an artificer, in the fabrication of any work, looks to thatwhich always subsists according to the same; and, employing a modelof this kind, expresses its idea and power in his work; it must follow,that his production should be beautiful. But when he beholds that whichis born and dies, it will be far from beautiful."Thus ever: the Banquet is a teaching in the same spirit, familiar nowto all the poetry, and to all the sermons of the world, that the loveof the sexes is initial; and symbolizes, at a distance, the passionof the soul for that immense lake of beauty it exists to seek. Thisfaith in the Divinity is never out of mind, and constitutes thelimitation of all his dogmas. Body cannot teach wisdom;--God only. Inthe same mind, he constantly affirms that virtue cannot be taught;that it is not a science, but an inspiration; that the greatest goodsare produced to us through mania, and are assigned to us by a divinegift.This leads me to that central figure, which he has established in hisAcademy, as the organ through which every considered opinion shall beannounced, and whose biography he has likewise so labored, that thehistoric facts are lost in the light of Plato's mind. Socrates andPlato are the double star, which the most powerful instruments willnot entirely separate. Socrates, again, in his traits and genius, isthe best example of that synthesis which constitutes Plato'sextraordinary power. Socrates, a man of humble stem, but honest enough;of the commonest history; of a personal homeliness so remarkable, asto be a cause of wit in others,--the rather that his broad good natureand exquisite taste for a joke invited the sally, which was sure tobe paid. The players personated him on the stage; the potters copiedhis ugly face on their stone jugs. He was a cool fellow, adding to hishumor a perfect temper, and a knowledge of his man, be he who he mightwhom he talked with, which laid the companion open to certain defeatin any debate,--and in debate he immoderately delighted. The young menare prodigiously fond of him, and invite him to their feasts, whitherhe goes for conversation. He can drink, too; has the strongest headin Athens; and, after leaving the whole party under the table, goesaway, as if nothing had happened, to begin new dialogues with somebodythat is sober. In short, he was what our country-people call an oldone.He affected a good many citizen-like tastes, was monstrously fond ofAthens, hated trees, never willingly went beyond the walls, knew theold characters, valued the bores and philistines, thought everythingin Athens a little better than anything in any other place. He wasplain as a Quaker in habit and speech, affected low phrases, andillustrations from cocks and quails, soup-pans and sycamore-spoons,grooms and farriers, and unnameable offices,--especially if he talkedwith any superfine person. He had a Franklin-like wisdom. Thus, heshowed one who was afraid to go on foot to Olympia, that it was nomore than his daily walk within doors, if continuously extended, wouldeasily reach.Plain old uncle as he was, with his great ears,--an immense talker,--therumor ran, that, on one or two occasions, in the war with Boeotia, hehad shown a determination which had covered the retreat of a troop;and there was some story that, under cover of folly, he had, in thecity government, when one day he chanced to hold a seat there, evinceda courage in opposing singly the popular voice, which had well-nighruined him. He is very poor; but then he is hardy as a soldier, andcan live on a few olives; usually, in the strictest sense, on breadand water, except when entertained by his friends. His necessaryexpenses were exceedingly small, and no one could live as he did. Hewore no undergarment; his upper garment was the same for summer andwinter; and he went barefooted; and it is said that, to procure thepleasure, which he loves, of talking at his ease all day with the mostelegant and cultivated young men, he will now and then return to hisshop, and carve statues, good or bad, for sale. However that be, itis certain that he had grown to delight in nothing else than thisconversation; and that, under his hypocritical pretense of knowingnothing, he attacks and brings down all the fine speakers, all thefine philosophers of Athens, whether natives, or strangers from AsiaMinor and the islands. Nobody can refuse to talk with him, he is sohonest, and really curious to know; a man who was willingly confuted,if he did not speak the truth, and who willingly confuted others,asserting what was false; and not less pleased when confuted than whenconfuting; for he thought not any evil happened to men, of such amagnitude as false opinion respecting the just and unjust. A pitilessdisputant, who knows nothing, but the bounds of whose conqueringintelligence no man had ever reached; whose temper was imperturbable;whose dreadful logic was always leisurely and sportive; so carelessand ignorant as to disarm the weariest, and draw them, in thepleasantest manner, into horrible doubts and confusion. But he alwaysknew the way out; knew it, yet would not tell it. No escape; he drivesthem to terrible choices by his dilemmas, and tosses the Hippiases andGorgiases, with their grand reputations, as a boy tosses his balls.The tyrannous realist!-Meno has discoursed a thousand times, at length,on virtue, before many companies, and very well, as it appeared tohim; but, at this moment, he cannot even tell what it is,--thiscramp-fish of a Socrates has so bewitched him.This hard-headed humorist, whose strange conceits, drollery, and_bon-hommie_, diverted the young patricians, whilst the rumor ofhis sayings and quibbles gets abroad every day, turns out, in a sequel,to have a probity as invincible as his logic and to be either insane,or, at least, under cover of this play, enthusiastic in his religion.When accused before the judges of subverting the popular creed, heaffirms the immortality of the soul, the future reward and punishment;and, refusing to recant, in a caprice of the popular government, wascondemned to die, and sent to the prison. Socrates entered the prison,and took away all ignominy from the place, which could not be a prison,whilst he was there. Crito bribed the jailor; but Socrates would notgo out by treachery. "Whatever inconvenience ensue, nothing is to bepreferred before justice. These things I hear like pipes and drums,whose sound makes me deaf to everything you say." The fame of thisprison, the fame of the discourses there, and the drinking of thehemlock, are one of the most precious passages in the history of theworld.The rare coincidence, in one ugly body, of the droll and the martyr,the keen street and market debater with the sweetest saint known toany history at that time, had forcibly struck the mind of Plato, socapacious of these contrasts; and the figure of Socrates, by anecessity, placed itself in the foreground of the scene, as the fittestdispenser of the intellectual treasurers he had to communicate. It wasa rare fortune, that this Aesod of the mob, and this robed scholar,should meet, to make each other immortal in their mutual faculty. Thestrange synthesis, in the character of Socrates, capped the synthesisin the mind of Plato. Moreover, by this means, he was able, in thedirect way, and without envy, to avail himself of the wit and weightof Socrates, to which unquestionably his own debt was great; and thesederived again their principal advantage from the perfect art of Plato.It remains to say, that the defect of Plato in power is only that whichresults inevitably from his quality. He is intellectual in his aim;and, therefore, in expression, literary. Mounting into heaven, drivinginto the pit, expounding the laws of the state, the passion of love,the remorse of crime, the hope of the parting soul,--he is literary,and never otherwise. It is almost the sole deduction from the meritof Plato, that his writings have not,--what is, no doubt, incidentto this regnancy of intellect in his work,--the vital authority whichthe screams of prophets and the sermons of unlettered Arabs and Jewspossess. There is an interval; and to cohesion, contact is necessary.I know not what can be said in reply to this criticism, but that wehave come to a fact in the nature of things: an oak is not an orange.The qualities of sugar remain with sugar, and those of salt, with salt.In the second place, he has not a system. The dearest defenders anddisciples are at fault. He attempted a theory of the universe, and histheory is not complete or self-evident. One man thinks he means this,and another, that: he has said one thing in one place, and the reverseof it in another place. He is charged with having failed to make thetransition from ideas to matter. Here is the world, sound as a nut,perfect, not the smallest piece of chaos left, never a stitch nor anend, not a mark of haste, or botching, or second thought; but thetheory of the world is a thing of shreds and patches.The longest wave is quickly lost in the sea. Plato would willinglyhave a Platonism, a known and accurate expression for the world, andit should be accurate. It shall be the world passed through the mindof Plato,--nothing less. Every atom shall have the Platonic tinge;every atom, every relation or quality you knew before, you shall knowagain and find here, but now ordered; not nature, but art. And youshall feel that Alexander indeed overran, with men and horses, somecountries of the planet; but countries, and things of which countriesare made, elements, planet itself, laws of planet and of men, havepassed through this man as bread into his body, and become no longerbread, but body: so all this mammoth morsel has become Plato. He hasclapped copyright on the world. This is the ambition of individualism.But the mouthful proves too large. Boa constrictor has good will toeat it, but he is foiled. He falls abroad in the attempt; and biting,gets strangled: the bitten world holds the biter fast by his own teeth.There he perishes: unconquered nature lives on, and forgets him. Soit fares with all: so must it fare with Plato. In view of eternalnature, Plato turns out to be philosophical exercitations. He argueson this side, and on that. The acutest German, the lovingest disciple,could never tell what Platonism was; indeed, admirable texts can bequoted on both sides of every great question from him.These things we are forced to say, if we must consider the effort ofPlato, or of any philosopher, to dispose of Nature,--which will notbe disposed of. No power of genius has ever yet had the smallest successin explaining existence. The perfect enigma remains. But there is aninjustice in assuming this ambition for Plato. Let us not seem to treatwith flippancy his venerable name. Men, in proportion to theirintellect, have admitted his transcendent claims. The way to know him,is to compare him, not with nature, but with other men. How many ageshave gone by, and he remains unapproached! A chief structure of humanwit, like Karnac, or the mediaeval cathedrals, or the Etrurian remains,it requires all the breadth of human faculty to know it. I think itis truliest seen, when seen with the most respect. His sense deepens,his merits multiply, with study. When we say, here is a fine collectionof fables; or, when we praise the style; or the common sense; orarithmetic; we speak as boys, and much of our impatient criticism ofthe dialectic, I suspect, is no better. The criticism is like ourimpatience of miles when we are in a hurry; but it is still best thata mile should have seventeen hundred and sixty yards. The great-eyedPlato proportioned the lights and shades after the genius of our life.PLATO: NEW READINGSThe publication, in Mr. Bohn's "Serial Library," of the excellenttranslations of Plato, which we esteem one of the chief benefits thecheap press has yielded, gives us an occasion to take hastily a fewmore notes of the elevation and bearings of this fixed star; or, toadd a bulletin, like the journals, of Plato at the latest dates.Modern science, by the extent of its generalization, has learned toindemnify the student of man for the defects of individuals, by tracinggrowth and ascent in races; and, by the simple expedient of lightingup the vast background, generates a feeling of complacency and hope.The human being has the saurian and the plant in his rear. His artsand sciences, the easy issue of his brain, look glorious whenprospectively beheld from the distant brain of ox, crocodile, and fish.It seems as if nature, in regarding the geologic night behind her,when, in five or six millenniums, she had turned out five or six men,as Homer, Phidias, Menu, and Columbus, was nowise discontented withthe result. These samples attested the virtue of the tree. These werea clear amelioration of trilobite and saurus, and a good basis forfurther proceeding. With this artist time and space are cheap, and sheis insensible of what you say of tedious preparation. She waitedtranquilly the flowing periods of paleontology, for the hour to bestruck when man should arrive. Then periods must pass before the motionof the earth can be suspected; then before the map of the instinctsand the cultivable powers can be drawn. But as of races, so thesuccession of individual men is fatal and beautiful, and Plato has thefortune, in the history of mankind, to mark an epoch.Plato's fame does not stand on a syllogism, or on any masterpieces ofthe Socratic, or on any thesis, as, for example, the immortality ofthe soul. He is more than an expert, or a school-man, or a geometer,or the prophet of a peculiar message. He represents the privilege ofthe intellect, the power, namely, of carrying up every fact tosuccessive platforms, and so disclosing, in every fact, a germ ofexpansion. These expansions are in the essence of thought. Thenaturalist would never help us to them by any discoveries of the extentof the universe, but is as poor, when cataloguing the resolved nebulaof Orion, as when measuring the angles of an acre. But the Republicof Plato, by these expansions, may be said to require, and so toanticipate, the astronomy of Laplace. The expansions are organic. Themind does not create what it perceives, any more than the eye createsthe rose. In ascribing to Plato the merit of announcing them, we onlysay, here was a more complete man, who could apply to nature the wholescale of the senses, the understanding, and the reason. Theseexpansions, or extensions, consist in continuing the spiritual sightwhere the horizon falls on our natural vision, and, by this secondsight, discovering the long lines of law which shoot in every direction.Everywhere he stands on a path which has no end, but runs continuouslyround the universe. Therefore, every word becomes an exponent of nature.Whatever he looks upon discloses a second sense, and ulterior senses.His perception of the generation of contraries, of death out of life,and life out of death,--that law by which, in nature, decompositionis recomposition, and putrefaction and cholera are only signals of anew creation; his discernment of the little in the large, and the largein the small; studying the state in the citizen, and the citizen inthe state; and leaving it doubtful whether he exhibited the Republicas an allegory on the education of the private soul; his beautifuldefinitions of ideas, of time, of form, of figure, of the line,sometimes hypothetically given, as his defining of virtue, courage,justice, temperance; his love of the apologue, and his apologuesthemselves; the cave of Trophonius; the ring of Gyges; the charioteerand two horses; the golden, silver, brass, and iron temperaments;Theuth and Thamus; and the visions of Hades and the Fates--fables whichhave imprinted themselves in the human memory like the signs of thezodiac; his soliform eye and his boniform soul; his doctrine ofassimilation; his doctrine of reminiscence; his clear vision of thelaws of return, or reaction, which secure instant justice throughoutthe universe, instanced everywhere, but specially in the doctrine,"what comes from God to us, returns from us to God," and in Socrates'belief that the laws below are sisters of the laws above.More striking examples are his moral conclusions. Plato affirms thecoincidence of science and virtue; for vice can never know itself andvirtue; but virtue knows both itself and vice. The eye attested thatjustice was best, as long as it was profitable; Plato affirms that itis profitable throughout; that the profit is intrinsic, though thejust conceal his justice from gods and men; that it is better to sufferinjustice, than to do it; that the sinner ought to covet punishment;that the lie was more hurtful than homicide; and that ignorance, orthe involuntary lie, was more calamitous than involuntary homicide;that the soul is unwillingly deprived of true opinions; and that noman sins willingly; that the order of proceeding of nature was fromthe mind to the body; and, though a sound body cannot restore an unsoundmind, yet a good soul can, by its virtue, render the body the bestpossible. The intelligent have a right over the ignorant, namely, theright of instructing them. The right punishment of one out of tune,is to make him play in tune; the fine which the good, refusing togovern, ought to pay, is, to be governed by a worse man; that hisguards shall not handle gold and silver, but shall be instructed thatthere is gold and silver in their souls, which will make men willingto give them everything which they need. This second sight explainsthe stress laid on geometry. He saw that the globe of earth was notmore lawful and precise than was the supersensible; that a celestialgeometry was in place there, as a logic of lines and angles here below;that the world was throughout mathematical; the proportions are constantof oxygen, azote, and lime; there is just so much water, and slate,and magnesia; not less are the proportions constant of moral elements.This eldest Goethe, hating varnish and falsehood, delighted in revealingthe real at the base of the accidental; in discovering connection,continuity, and representation, everywhere; hating insulation; andappears like the god of wealth among the cabins of vagabonds, openingpower and capability in everything he touches. Ethical science was newand vacant, when Plato could write thus:--"Of all whose arguments areleft to the men of the present time, no one has ever yet condemnedinjustice, or praised justice, otherwise than as respects the repute,honors, and emoluments arising therefrom; while, as respects eitherof them in itself, and subsisting by its own power in the soul of thepossessor, and concealed both from gods and men, no one has yetsufficiently investigated, either in poetry or prose writings,--how,namely, that the one is the greatest of all the evils that the soulhas within it, and justice the greatest good."His definition of ideas, as what is simple, permanent, uniform, andself-existent, forever discriminating them from the notions of theunderstanding, marks an era in the world. He was born to behold theself-evolving power of spirit, endless generator of new ends; a powerwhich is the key at once to the centrality and the evanescence ofthings. Plato is so centered, that he can well spare all his dogmas.Thus the fact of knowledge and ideas reveals to him the fact ofeternity; and the doctrine of reminiscence he offers as the mostprobable particular explication. Call that fanciful,--it matters not;the connection between our knowledge and the abyss of being is stillreal, and the explication must be not less magnificent.He has indicated every eminent point in speculation. He wrote on thescale of the mind itself, so that all things have symmetry in histablet. He put in all the past, without weariness, and descended intodetail with a courage like that he witnessed in nature. One would say,that his forerunners had mapped out each a farm, or a district, or anisland, in intellectual geography, but that Plato first drew the sphere.He domesticates the soul in nature; man is the microcosm. All thecircles of the visible heaven represent as many circles in the rationalsoul. There is no lawless particle, and there is nothing casual in theaction of the human mind. The names of things, too, are fatal, followingthe nature of things. All the gods of the Pantheon are, by their names,significant of a profound sense. The gods are the ideas. Pan is speech,or manifestation; Saturn, the contemplative; Jove, the regal soul; andMars, passion. Venus is proportion; Calliope, the soul of the world;Aglaia, intellectual illustration.These thoughts, in sparkles of light, had appeared often to pious andto poetic souls; but this well-bred, all-knowing Greek geometer comeswith command, gathers them all up into rank and gradation, the Euclidof holiness, and marries the two parts of nature. Before all men, hesaw the intellectual values of the moral sentiment. He describes hisown ideal, when he paints in Timaeus a god leading things from disorderinto order. He kindled a fire so truly in the center, that we see thesphere illuminated, and can distinguish poles, equator, and lines oflatitude, every arc and node; a theory so averaged, so modulated, thatyou would say, the winds of ages had swept through this rhythmicstructure, and not that it was the brief extempore blotting of oneshort-lived scribe. Hence it has happened that a very well-markedclass of souls, namely those who delight in giving a spiritual, thatis, an ethico-intellectual expression to every truth by exhibiting anulterior end which is yet legitimate to it, are said to Platonize.Thus, Michel Angelo is a Platonist, in his sonnets. Shakspeare is aPlatonist, when he writes, "Nature is made better by no mean, butnature makes that mean," or,   "He that can endure   To follow with allegiance a fallen lord,   Does conquer him that did his master conquer,   And earns a place in the story."Hamlet is a pure Platonist, and 'tis the magnitude only of Shakspeare'sproper genius that hinders him from being classed as the most eminentof this school. Swedenborg, throughout his prose poem of "ConjugalLove," is a Platonist.His subtlety commended him to men of thought. The secret of his popularsuccess is the moral aim, which endeared him to mankind. "Intellect,"he said, "is king of heaven and of earth;" but, in Plato, intellectis always moral. His writings have also the sempiternal youth of poetry.For their arguments, most of them, might have been couched in sonnets;and poetry has never soared higher than in the Timaeus and the Phaedrus.As the poet, too, he is only contemplative. He did not, like Pythagoras,break himself with an institution. All his painting in the Republicmust be esteemed mythical, with intent to bring out, sometimes inviolent colors, his thought. You cannot institute, without peril ofcharlatan.It was a high scheme, his absolute privilege for the best (which, tomake emphatic, he expressed by community of women), as the premiumwhich he would set on grandeur. There shall be exempts of two kinds:first, those who by demerit have put themselves belowprotection,--outlaws; and secondly, those who by eminence of natureand desert are out of the reach of your rewards; let such be free ofthe city, and above the law. We confide them to themselves; let themdo with us as they will. Let none presume to measure the irregularitiesof Michel Angelo and Socrates by village scales.In his eighth book of the Republic, he throws a little mathematicaldust in our eyes. I am sorry to see him, after such noble superiorities,permitting the lie to governors. Plato plays Providence a little withthe baser sort, as people allow themselves with their dogs and cats.III. SWEDENBORG; OR, THE MYSTIC.Among eminent persons, those who are most dear to men are not the classwhich the economists call producers; they have nothing in their hands;they have not cultivated corn, nor made bread; they have not led outa colony, nor invented a loom. A higher class, in the estimation andlove of this city-building, market-going race of mankind, are thepoets, who, from the intellectual kingdom, feed the thought andimagination with ideas and pictures which raise men out of the worldof corn and money, and console them for the shortcomings of the day,and the meannesses of labor and traffic. Then, also, the philosopherhas his value, who flatters the intellect of this laborer, by engaginghim with subtleties which instruct him in new faculties. Others maybuild cities; he is to understand them, and keep them in awe. But thereis a class who lead us into another region,--the world of morals, orof will. What is singular about this region of thought, is, its claim.Wherever the sentiment of right comes in, it takes precedence ofeverything else. For other things, I make poetry of them; but the moralsentiment makes poetry of me.I have sometimes thought that he would render the greatest service tomodern criticism, who shall draw the line of relation that subsistsbetween Shakespeare and Swedenborg. The human mind stands ever inperplexity, demanding intellect, demanding sanctity, impatient equallyof each without the other. The reconciler has not yet appeared. If wetire of the saints, Shakespeare is our city of refuge. Yet the instinctspresently teach, that the problem of essence must take precedence ofall others,--the questions of Whence? What? and Whither? and thesolution of these must be in a life, and not in a book. A drama orpoem is a proximate or oblique reply; but Moses, Menu, Jesus, workdirectly on this problem. The atmosphere of moral sentiment is a regionof grandeur which reduces all material magnificence to toys, yet opensto every wretch that has reason, the doors of the universe. Almostwith a fierce haste it lays its empire on the man. In the language ofthe Koran, "God said, the heaven and the earth, and all that is betweenthem, think ye that we created them in jest, and that ye shall notreturn to us?" It is the kingdom of the will, and by inspiring thewill, which is the seat of personality, seems to convert the universeinto a person:--  "The realms of being to no other bow,  Not only all are thine, but all are Thou."All men are commanded by the saint. The Koran makes a distinct classof those who are by nature good, and whose goodness has an influenceon others, and pronounces this class to be the aim of creation: theother classes are admitted to the feast of being, only as followingin the train of this. And the Persian poet exclaims to a soul of thiskind:  "Go boldly forth, and feast on being's banquet;  Thou art the called,--the rest admitted with thee."The privilege of this caste is an access to the secrets and structureof nature, by some higher method than by experience. In common parlance,what one man is said to learn by experience, a man of extraordinarysagacity is said, without experience, to divine. The Arabians say,that Abul Khain, the mystic, and Abu Ali Seena, the Philosopher,conferred together; and, on parting, the philosopher said, "All thathe sees, I know;" and the mystic said, "All that he knows, I see." Ifone should ask the reason of this intuition, the solution would leadus into that property which Plato denoted as Reminiscence, and whichis implied by the Bramins in the tenet of Transmigration. The soulhaving been often born, or, as the Hindoos say, "traveling the pathof existence through thousands of births," having beheld the thingswhich are here, those which are in heaven, and those which are beneath,there is nothing of which she has not gained the knowledge: no wonderthat she is able to recollect, in regard to any one thing, what formerlyshe knew. "For, all things in nature being linked and related, andthe soul having heretofore known all, nothing hinders but that any manwho has recalled to mind, or, according to the common phrase, haslearned one thing only, should of himself recover all his ancientknowledge, and find out again all the rest, if he have but courage,and faint not in the midst of his researches. For inquiry and learningis reminiscence all." How much more, if he that inquires be a holy andgodlike soul! For, by being assimilated to the original soul, by whom,and after whom, all things subsist, the soul of man does then easilyflow into all things, and all things flow into it: they mix: and heis present and sympathetic with their structure and law.This path is difficult, secret, and beset with terror. The ancientscalled it ecstasy or absence,--a getting out of their bodies to think.All religious history contains traces of the trance of saints,--abeatitude, but without any sign of joy, earnest, solitary, even sad;"the flight," Plotinus called it, "of the alone to the alone." Thetrances of Socrates, Plotinus, Porphyry, Behmen, Bunyan, Fox, Pascal,Guion, Swedenborg, will readily come to mind. But what as readily comesto mind, is the accompaniment of disease. This beatitude comes interror, and with shocks to the mind of the receiver. "It o'erinformsthe tenement of clay," and drives the man mad; or, gives a certainviolent bias, which taints his judgment. In the chief examples ofreligious illumination, somewhat morbid, has mingled, in spite of theunquestionable increase of mental power. Must the highest good dragafter it a quality which neutralizes and discredits it?--                                "Indeed it takes  From our achievements, when performed at height,  The pith and marrow of our attribute."Shall we say, that the economical mother disburses so much earth andso much fire, by weight and metre, to make a man, and will not add apennyweight, though a nation is perishing for a leader? Therefore, themen of God purchased their science by folly or pain. If you will havepure carbon, carbuncle, or diamond, to make the brain transparent, thetrunk and organs shall be so much the grosser: instead of porcelain,they are potter's earth, clay, or mud.In modern times, no such remarkable example of this introverted mindhas occurred, as in Emanuel Swedenborg, born in Stockholm, in 1688.This man, who appeared to his contemporaries a visionary, and elixirof moonbeams, no doubt led the most real life of any man then in theworld: and now, when the royal and ducal Frederics, Cristierns, andBrunswicks, of that day, have slid into oblivion, he begins to spreadhimself into the minds of thousands. As happens in great men, he seemed,by the variety and amount of his powers, to be a composition of severalpersons,--like the giant fruits which are matured in gardens by theunion of four or five single blossoms. His frame is on a larger scale,and possesses the advantage of size. As it is easier to see thereflection of the great sphere in large globes, though defaced by somecrack or blemish, than in drops of water, so men of large calibre,though with some eccentricity or madness, like Pascal or Newton, helpus more than balanced mediocre minds.His youth and training could not fail to be extraordinary. Such a boycould not whistle or dance, but goes grubbing into mines and mountains,prying into chemistry and optics, physiology, mathematics, andastronomy, to find images fit for the measure of his versatile andcapacious brain. He was a scholar from a child, and was educated atUpsala. At the age of twenty-eight, he was made Assessor of the Boardof Mines, by Charles XII. In 1716, he left home for four years, andvisited the universities of England, Holland, France, and Germany. Heperformed a notable feat of engineering in 1718, at the siege ofFredericshall, by hauling two galleys, five boats, and a sloop, somefourteen English miles overland, for the royal service. In 1721 hejourneyed over Europe, to examine mines and smelting works. Hepublished, in 1716, his Daedalus Hyperboreus, and, from this time, forthe next thirty years, was employed in the composition and publicationof his scientific works. With the like force, he threw himself intotheology. In 1743, when he was fifty-four years old, what is calledhis illumination began. All his metallurgy, and transportation of shipsoverland, was absorbed into this ecstasy. He ceased to publish anymore scientific books, withdrew from his practical labors, and devotedhimself to the writing and publication of his voluminous theologicalworks, which were printed at his own expense, or at that of the Dukeof Brunswick, or other prince, at Dresden, Liepsic, London, orAmsterdam. Later, he resigned his office of Assessor: the salaryattached to this office continued to be paid to him during his life.His duties had brought him into intimate acquaintance with King CharlesXII., by whom he was much consulted and honored. The like favor wascontinued to him by his successor. At the Diet of 1751, Count Hopkensays, the most solid memorials on finance were from his pen. In Sweden,he appears to have attracted a marked regard. His rare science andpractical skill, and the added fame of second sight and extraordinaryreligious knowledge and gifts, drew to him queens, nobles, clergy,shipmasters, and people about the ports through which he was wont topass in his many voyages. The clergy interfered a little with theimportation and publication of his religious works; but he seems tohave kept the friendship of men in power. He was never married. He hadgreat modesty and gentleness of bearing. His habits were simple; helived on bread, milk, and vegetables; and he lived in a house situatedin a large garden; he went several times to England, where he does notseem to have attracted any attention whatever from the learned or theeminent; and died at London, March 29, 1772, of apoplexy, in hiseighty-fifth year. He is described, when in London, as a man of quiet,clerical habit, not averse to tea and coffee, and kind to children.He wore a sword when in full velvet dress, and, whenever he walkedout, carried a gold-headed cane. There is a common portrait of him inantique coat and wig, but the face has a wandering or vacant air.The genius which was to penetrate the science of the age with a farmore subtle science; to pass the bounds of space and time; ventureinto the dim spirit-realm, and attempt to establish a new religion inthe world,--began its lessons in quarries and forges, in thesmelting-pot and crucible, in ship-yards and dissecting-rooms. No oneman is perhaps able to judge of the merits of his works on so manysubjects. One is glad to learn that his books on mines and metals areheld in the highest esteem by those who understand these matters. Itseems that he anticipated much science of the nineteenth century;anticipated, in astronomy, the discovery of the seventh planet,--but,unhappily, not also of the eighth; anticipated the views of modernastronomy in regard to the generation of earth by the sun; in magnetism,some important experiments and conclusions of later students; inchemistry, the atomic theory; in anatomy, the discoveries ofSchlichting, Monro, and Wilson; and first demonstrated the office ofthe lungs. His excellent English editor magnanimously lays no stresson his discoveries, since he was too great to care to be original; andwe are to judge, by what he can spare, of what remains.A colossal soul, he lies vast abroad on his times, uncomprehended bythem, and requires a long local distance to be seen; suggest, asAristotle, Bacon, Selden, Humboldt, that a certain vastness of learning,or _quasi_ omnipresence of the human soul in nature, is possible.His superb speculations, as from a tower, over nature and arts, withoutever losing sight of the texture and sequence of things, almost realizeshis own picture, in the "Principia," of the original integrity of man.Over and above the merit of his particular discoveries, is the capitalmerit of his self-equality. A drop of water has the properties of thesea, but cannot exhibit a storm. There is beauty of a concert, as wellas of a flute; strength of a host, as well as of a hero; and, inSwedenborg, those who are best acquainted with modern books, will mostadmire the merit of mass. One of the missouriums and mastodons ofliterature, he is not to be measured by whole colleges of ordinaryscholars. His stalwart presence would flutter the gowns of anuniversity. Our books are false by being fragmentary; their sentencesare _bon mots_, and not parts of natural discourse; childish expressionsof surprise or pleasure in nature; or, worse, owing a brief notoriety totheir petulance, or aversion from the order of nature,--being somecuriosity or oddity, designedly not in harmony with nature, andpurposely framed to excite a surprise, as jugglers do by concealingtheir means. But Swedenborg is systematic, and respective of the worldin every sentence; all the means are orderly given; his faculties workwith astronomic punctuality, and this admirable writing is pure from allpertness or egotism.Swedenborg was born into an atmosphere of great ideas. 'Tis hard tosay what was his own: yet his life was dignified by noblest picturesof the universe. The robust Aristotelian method, with its breadth andadequateness, shaming our sterile and linear logic by its genialradiation, conversant with series and degree, with effects and ends,skilful to discriminate power from form, essence from accident, andopening by its terminology and definition, high roads into nature, hadtrained a race of athletic philosophers. Harvey had shown thecirculation of the blood; Gilbert had shown that the earth was a magnet;Descartes, taught by Gilbert's magnet, with its vortex, spiral, andpolarity, had filled Europe with the leading thought of vortical motion,as the secret of nature. Newton, in the year in which Swedenborg wasborn, published the "Principia," and established the universal gravity.Malpighi, following the high doctrines of Hippocrates, Leucippus, andLucretius, had given emphasis to the dogma that nature works inleasts,--"_tota in minimis existit natura_." Unrivalled dissectors,Swammerdam, Leeuwenhoek, Winslow, Eustachius, Heister, Vesalius,Boerhaave, had left nothing for scalpel or microscope to reveal inhuman or comparative anatomy; Linnaeus, his contemporary, was affirming,in his beautiful science, that "Nature is always like herself;" and,lastly, the nobility of method, the largest application of principles,had been exhibited by Leibnitz and Christian Wolff, in cosmology;whilst Locke and Grotius had drawn the moral argument. What was leftfor a genius of the largest calibre, but to go over their ground, andverify and unite? It is easy to see, in these minds, the original ofSwedenborg's studies, and the suggestion of his problems. He had acapacity to entertain and vivify these volumes of thought. Yet theproximity of these geniuses, one or other of whom had introduced allhis leading ideas, makes Swedenborg another example of the difficulty,even in a highly fertile genius, of proving originality, the firstbirth and annunciation of one of the laws of nature.He named his favorite views, the doctrine of Forms, the doctrine ofSeries and Degrees, the doctrine of Influx, the doctrine ofCorrespondence. His statement of these doctrines deserves to be studiedin his books. Not every man can read them, but they will reward himwho can. His theologic works are valuable to illustrate these. Hiswritings would be a sufficient library to a lonely and athletic student;and the "Economy of the Animal Kingdom" is one of those books which,by the sustained dignity of thinking, is an honor to the human race.He had studied spars and metals to some purpose. His varied and solidknowledge makes his style lustrous with points and shooting spiculaof thought, and resembling one of those winter mornings when the airsparkles with crystals. The grandeur of the topics makes the grandeurof the style. He was apt for cosmology, because of that nativeperception of identity which made mere size of no account to him. Inthe atom of magnetic iron, he saw the quality which would generate thespiral motion of sun and planet.The thoughts in which he lived were, the universality of each law innature; the Platonic doctrine of the scale or degrees; the version orconversion of each into other, and so the correspondence of all theparts; the fine secret that little explains large, and large, little;the centrality of man in nature, and the connection that subsiststhroughout all things: he saw that the human body was strictlyuniversal, or an instrument through which the soul feeds and is fedby the whole of matter: so that he held, in exact antagonism to theskeptics, that, "the wiser a man is, the more will he be a worshipperof the Deity." In short, he was a believer in the Identity-philosophy,which he held not idly, as the dreamers of Berlin or Boston, but whichhe experimented with and established through years of labor, with theheart and strength of the rudest Viking that his rough Sweden eversent to battle.This theory dates from the oldest philosophers, and derives perhapsits best illustration from the newest. It is this: that nature iteratesher means perpetually on successive planes. In the old aphorism, natureis always self-similar. In the plant, the eye or germinative pointopens to a leaf, then to another leaf, with a power of transformingthe leaf into radicle, stamen, pistil, petal, bract, sepal, or seed.The whole art of the plant is still to repeat leaf on leaf withoutend, the more or less of heat, light, moisture, and food, determiningthe form it shall assume. In the animal, nature makes a vertebra, ora spine of vertebrae, and helps herself still by a new spine, with alimited power of modifying its form,--spine on spine, to the end ofthe world. A poetic anatomist, in our own day, teaches that a snake,being a horizontal line, and man, being an erect line, constitute aright angle; and, between the lines of this mystical quadrant, allanimate beings find their place; and he assumes the hair-worm, thespan-worm, or the snake, as the type of prediction of the spine.Manifestly, at the end of the spine, nature puts out smaller spines,as arms; at the end of the arms, new spines, as hands; at the otherend, she repeats the process, as legs and feet. At the top of thecolumn, she puts out another spine, which doubles or loops itself over,as a span-worm, into a ball, and forms the skull, with extremitiesagain; the hands being now the upper jaw, the feet the lower jaw, thefingers and toes being represented this time by upper and lower teeth.This new spine is destined to high uses. It is a new man on theshoulders of the last. It can almost shed its trunk, and manage tolive alone, according to the Platonic idea in the Timaeus. Within it,on a higher plane, all that was done in the trunk repeats itself.Nature recites her lesson once more in a higher mood. The mind is afiner body, and resumes its functions of feeding, digesting, absorbing,excluding, and generating, in a new and ethereal element. Here, in thebrain, is all the process of alimentation repeated, in the acquiring,comparing, digesting, and assimilating of experience. Here again isthe mystery of generation repeated. In the brain are male and femalefaculties; here is marriage, here is fruit. And there is no limit tothis ascending scale, but series on series. Everything, at the end ofone use, is taken up into the next, each series punctually repeatingevery organ and process of the last. We are adapted to infinity. Weare hard to please, and love nothing which ends; and in nature is noend; but everything, at the end of one use, is lifted into a superior,and the ascent of these things climbs into daemonic and celestialnatures. Creative force, like a musical composer, goes on unweariedlyrepeating a simple air or theme now high, now low, in solo, in chorus,ten thousand times reverberated, till it fills earth and heaven withthe chant.Gravitation, as explained by Newton, is good, but grandeur, when wefind chemistry only an extension of the law of masses into particles,and that the atomic theory shows the action of chemistry to bemechanical also. Metaphysics shows us a sort of gravitation, operativealso in the mental phenomena; and the terrible tabulation of the Frenchstatists brings every piece of whim and humor to be reducible also toexact numerical rations. If one man in twenty thousand, or in thirtythousand, eats shoes, or marries his grandmother, then, in every twentythousand, or thirty thousand, is found one man who eats shoes, ormarries his grandmother. What we call gravitation, and fancy ultimate,is one fork of a mightier stream, for which we have yet no name.Astronomy is excellent; but it must come up into life to have its fullvalue, and not remain there in globes and spaces. The globule of bloodgyrates around its own axis in the human veins, as the planet in thesky; and the circles of intellect relate to those of the heavens. Eachlaw of nature has the like universality; eating, sleep or hybernation,rotation, generation, metamorphosis, vortical motion, which is seenin eggs as in planets. These grand rhymes or returns in nature,--thedear, best-known face startling us at every turn, under a mask sounexpected that we think it the face of a stranger, and, carrying upthe semblance into divine forms,--delighted the prophetic eye ofSwedenborg; and he must be reckoned a leader in that revolution, which,by giving to science an idea, has given to an aimless accumulation ofexperiments, guidance and form, and a beating heart.I own, with some regret, that his printed works amount to about fiftystout octaves, his scientific works being about half of the wholenumber; and it appears that a mass of manuscript still unedited remainsin the royal library at Stockholm. The scientific works have just nowbeen translated into English, in an excellent edition.Swedenborg printed these scientific books in the ten years from 1734to 1744, and they remained from that time neglected; and now, aftertheir century is complete, he has at last found a pupil in Mr.Wilkinson, in London, a philosophic critic, with a co-equal vigor ofunderstanding and imagination comparable only to Lord Bacon's, who hasproduced his master's buried books to the day, and transferred them,with every advantage, from their forgotten Latin into English, to goround the world in our commercial and conquering tongue. This startlingreappearance of Swedenborg, after a hundred years, in his pupil, isnot the least remarkable fact in his history. Aided, it is said, bythe munificence of Mr. Clissold, and also by his literary skill, thispiece of poetic justice is done. The admirable preliminary discourseswith which Mr. Wilkinson has enriched these volumes, throw all thecontemporary philosophy of England into shade, and leave me nothingto say on their proper grounds.The "Animal Kingdom" is a book of wonderful merits. It was writtenwith the highest end,--to put science and the soul, long estrangedfrom each other, at one again. It was an anatomist's account of thehuman body, in the highest style of poetry. Nothing can exceed thebold and brilliant treatment of a subject usually so dry and repulsive.He saw nature "wreathing through an everlasting spiral, with wheelsthat never dry, on axles that never creak," and sometimes sought "touncover those secret recess is where nature is sitting at the firesin the depths of her laboratory;" whilst the picture comes recommendedby the hard fidelity with which it is based on practical anatomy. Itis remarkable that this sublime genius decides, peremptorily for theanalytic, against the synthetic method; and, in a book whose geniusis a daring poetic synthesis, claims to confine himself to a rigidexperience.He knows, if he only, the flowing of nature and how wise was that oldanswer of Amasis to him who bade him drink up the sea,--"Yes, willingly,if you will stop the rivers that flow in." Few knew as much aboutnature and her subtle manners, or expressed more subtly her goings.He thought as large a demand is made on our faith by nature, as bymiracles. "He noted that in her proceeding from first principles throughher several subordinations, there was no state through which she didnot pass, as if her path lay through all things." "For as often as shebetakes herself upward from visible phenomena, or, in other words,withdraws herself inward, she instantly, as it were, disappears, whileno one knows what has become of her, or whither she is gone; so thatit is necessary to take science as a guide in pursuing her steps."The pursuing the inquiry under the light of an end or final cause,gives wonderful animation, a sort of personality to the whole writing.This book announces his favorite dogmas. The ancient doctrines ofHippocrates, that the brain is a gland; and of Leucippus, that theatom may be known by the mass; or, in Plato, the macrocosm by themicrocosm; and, in the verses of Lucretius,--  Ossa videlicet e pauxillis atque minutis  Ossibus sic et de pauxillis atque minutis  Visceribus viscus gigni, sanguenque creari  Sanguinis inter se multis coeuntibus guttis;  Ex aurique putat micis consistere posse  Aurum, et de terris terram concrescere parvis;  Ignibus ex igneis, humorem humoribus esse.                                          Lib. I. 835.  "The principle of all things entrails made  Of smallest entrails; bone, of smallest bone,  Blood, of small sanguine drops reduced to one;  Gold, of small grains; earth, of small sands compacted  Small drops to water, sparks to fire contracted:"and which Malpighi had summed in his maxim, that "nature exists entirelyin leasts,"--is a favorite thought of Swedenborg. "It is a constantlaw of the organic body, that large, compound, or visible forms existand subsist from smaller, simpler, and ultimately from invisible forms,which act similarly to the larger ones, but more perfectly and moreuniversally, and the least forms so perfectly and universally, as toinvolve an idea representative of their entire universe." The unitiesof each organ are so many little organs, homogeneous with theircompound; the unities of the tongue are little tongues; those of thestomach, little stomachs; those of the heart are little hearts. Thisfruitful idea furnishes a key to every secret. What was too small forthe eye to detect was read by the aggregates; what was too large, bythe units. There is no end to his application of the thought. "Hungeris an aggregate of very many little hungers, or losses of blood by thelittle veins all over the body." It is the key to his theology, also."Man is a kind of very minute heaven, corresponding to the world ofspirits and to heaven. Every particular idea of man, and everyaffection, yea, every smallest spark of his affection, is an image andeffigy of him. A spirit may be known from only a single thought. Godis the grand man."  The hardihood and thoroughness of his study ofnature required a theory of forms, also. "Forms ascend in order fromthe lowest to the highest. The lowest form is angular, or theterrestrial and corporeal. The second and next higher form is thecircular, which is also called the perpetual-angular, because thecircumference of a circle is a perpetual angle. The form above thisis the spiral, parent and measure of circular forms; its diameters arenot rectilinear, but variously circular, and have a spherical surfacefor center; therefore it is called the perpetual-circular. The formabove this is the vortical, or perpetual-spiral; next, theperpetual-vortical, or celestial; last, the perpetual-celestial, orspiritual."Was it strange that a genius so bold should take the last step,also,--conceive that he might attain the science of all sciences, tounlock the meaning of the world? In the first volume of the "AnimalKingdom," he broaches the subject, in a remarkable note.--"In our doctrine of Representations and Correspondences, we shall treatof both these symbolical and typical resemblances, and of theastonishing things which occur, I will not say, in the living bodyonly, but throughout nature, and which correspond so entirely to supremeand spiritual things, that one would swear that the physical world waspurely symbolical of the spiritual world; insomuch, that if we chooseto express any natural truth in physical and definite vocalterms, andto convert these terms only into the corresponding and spiritual terms,we shall by this means elicit a spiritual truth, or theological dogma,in place of the physical truth or precept; although no mortal wouldhave predicted that anything of the kind could possibly arise by bareliteral transposition; inasmuch as the one precept, consideredseparately from the other, appears to have absolutely no relation toit. I intend, hereafter, to communicate a number of examples of suchcorrespondences, together with a vocabulary containing the terms ofspiritual things, as well as of the physical things for which they areto be substituted. This symbolism pervades the living body."The fact, thus explicitly stated, is implied in all poetry, in allegory,in fable, in the use of emblems, and in the structure of language.Plato knew of it, as is evident from his twice bisected line, in thesixth book of the Republic. Lord Bacon had found that truth and naturediffered only as seal and print; and he instanced some physicalproportions, with their translation into a moral and political sense.Behmen, and all mystics, imply this law in their dark riddle-writing.The poets, in as far as they are poets, use it; but it is known tothem only, as the magnet was known for ages, as a toy. Swedenborg firstput the fact into a detached and scientific statement, because it washabitually present to him, and never not seen. It was involved, as weexplained already, in the doctrine of identity and iteration, becausethe mental series exactly tallies with the material series. It requiredan insight that could rank things in order and series; or, rather, itrequired such rightness of position, that the poles of the eye shouldcoincide with the axis of the world. The earth has fed its mankindthrough five or six millenniums, and they had sciences, religions,philosophies; and yet had failed to see the correspondence of meaningbetween every part and every other part. And, down to this hour,literature has no book in which the symbolism of things isscientifically opened. One would say, that, as soon as men had thefirst hint that every sensible object,--animal, rock, river, air,--nay,space and time, subsists not for itself, nor finally to a materialend, but as a picture-language, to tell another story of beings andduties, other science would be put by, and a science of such grandpresage would absorb all faculties; that each man would ask of allobjects, what they mean: Why does the horizon hold me fast, with myjoy and grief, in this center? Why hear I the same sense from countlessdiffering voices, and read one never quite expressed fact in endlesspicture-language? Yet, whether it be that these things will not beintellectually learned, or, that many centuries must elaborate andcompose so rare and opulent a soul,--there is no comet, rock-stratum,fossil, fish, quadruped, spider, or fungus, that, for itself, does notinterest more scholars and classifiers than the meaning and upshot ofthe frame of things.But Swedenborg was not content with the culinary use of the world. Inhis fifty-fourth year, these thoughts held him fast, and his profoundmind admitted the perilous opinion, too frequent in religious history,that he was an abnormal person, to whom was granted the privilege ofconversing with angels and spirits; and this ecstasy connected itselfwith just this office of explaining the moral import of the sensibleworld. To a right perception, at once broad and minute, of the orderof nature, he added the comprehension of the moral laws in their widestsocial aspects; but whatever he saw, through some excessivedetermination to form, in his constitution, he saw not abstractly, butin pictures, heard it in dialogues, constructed it in events. When heattempted to announce the law most sanely, he was forced to couch itin parable.Modern psychology offers no similar example of a deranged balance. Theprincipal powers continued to maintain a healthy action; and, to areader who can make due allowance in the report for the reporter'speculiarities, the results are still instructive, and a more strikingtestimony to the sublime laws he announced, than any that balanceddulness could afford. He attempts to give some account of the modusof the new state, affirming that "his presence in the spiritual worldis attended with a certain separation, but only as to the intellectualpart of his mind, not as to the will part;" and he affirms that "hesees, with the internal sight, the things that are in another life,more clearly than he sees the things which are here in the world."Having adopted the belief that certain books of the Old and NewTestaments were exact allegories, or written in the angelic and ecstaticmode, he employed his remaining years in extricating from the literal,the universal sense. He had borrowed from Plato the fine fable of "amost ancient people, men better than we, and dwelling nigher to thegods;" and Swedenborg added, that they used the earth symbolically;that these, when they saw terrestrial objects, did not think at allabout them, but only about those which they signified. Thecorrespondence between thoughts and things henceforward occupied him."The very organic form resembles the end inscribed on it." A man isin general, and in particular, an organizd justice or injustice,selfishness or gratitude. And the cause of this harmony he assignedin the Arcana: "The reason why all and single things, in the heavensand on earth, are representative, is because they exist from an influxof the Lord, through heaven." This design of exhibiting suchcorrespondences, which, if adequately executed, would be the poem ofthe world, in which all history and science would play an essentialpart, was narrowed and defeated by the exclusively theologic directionwhich his inquiries took. His perception of nature is not human anduniversal, but is mystical and Hebraic. He fastens each natural objectto a theologic notion:--a horse signifies carnal understanding; a tree,perception; the moon, faith; a cat means this; an ostrich, that; anartichoke, this other; and poorly tethers every symbol to a severalecclesiastic sense. The slippery Proteus is not so easily caught. Innature, each individual symbol plays innumerable parts, as each particleof matter circulates in turn through every system. The central identityenables any one symbol to express successively all the qualities andshades of the real being. In the transmission of the heavenly waters,every hose fits every hydrant. Nature avenges herself speedily on thehard pedantry that would chain her waves. She is no literalist.Everything must be taken genially, and we must be at the top of ourcondition to understand anything rightly.His theological bias thus fatally narrowed his interpretation of nature,and the dictionary of symbols is yet to be written. But the interpreter,whom mankind must still expect, will find no predecessor who hasapproached so near to the true problem.Swedenborg styles himself, in the title-page of his books, "Servantof the Lord Jesus Christ;" and by force of intellect, and in effect,he is the last Father in the Church, and is not likely to have asuccessor. No wonder that his depth of ethical wisdom should give himinfluence as a teacher. To the withered traditional church yieldingdry catechisms, he let in nature again, and the worshiper, escapingfrom the vestry of verbs and texts, is surprised to find himself aparty to the whole of his religion. His religion thinks for him, andis of universal application. He turns it on every side; it fits everypart of life, interprets and dignifies every circumstance. Instead ofa religion which visited him diplomatically three or four times,--when he was born, when he married, when he fell sick, and when he died,and for the rest never interfered with him,--here was a teaching whichaccompanied him all day, accompanied him even into sleep and dreams;into his thinking, and showed him through what a long ancestry histhoughts descend; into society, and showed by what affinities he wasgirt to his equals and his counterparts; into natural objects, andshowed their origin and meaning, what are friendly, and what arehurtful; and opened the future world, by indicating the continuity ofthe same laws. His disciples allege that their intellect is invigoratedby the study of his books.There is no such problem for criticism as his theological writings,their merits are so commanding; yet such grave deductions must be made.Their immense and sandy diffuseness is like the prairie, or the desert,and their incongruities are like the last deliration. He issuperfluously explanatory, and his feelings of the ignorance of men,strangely exaggerated. Men take truths of this nature very fast. Yethe abounds in assertions; he is a rich discoverer, and of things whichmost import us to know. His thought dwells in essential resemblances,like the resemblance of a house to the man who built it. He saw thingsin their law, in likeness of function, not of structure. There is aninvariable method and order in his delivery of his truth, the habitualproceeding of the mind from inmost to outmost. What earnestness andweightiness,--his eye never roving, without one swell of vanity, orone look to self, in any common form of literary pride! a theoreticor speculative man, but whom no practical man in the universe couldaffect to scorn. Plato is a gownsman; his garment, though of purple,and almost skywoven, is an academic robe, and hinders action with itsvoluminous folds. But this mystic is awful to Caesar. Lycurgus himselfwould bow.The moral insight of Swedenborg, the correction of popular errors, theannouncement of ethical laws, take him out of comparison with any othermodern writer, and entitle him to a place, vacant for some ages, amongthe lawgivers of mankind. That slow but commanding influence which hehas acquired, like that of other religious geniuses, must be excessivealso, and have its tides, before it subsides into a permanent amount.Of course, what is real and universal cannot be confined to the circleof those who sympathize strictly with his genius, but will pass forthinto the common stock of wise and just thinking. The world has a surechemistry, by which it attracts what is excellent in its children, andlets fall the infirmities and limitations of the grandest mind.That metempsychosis which is familiar in the old mythology of theGreeks, collected in Ovid, and in the Indian Transmigration, and isthere objective, or really takes place in bodies by alien will,--inSwedenborg's mind, has a more philosophic character. It is subjective,or depends entirely upon the thought of the person. All things in theuniverse arrange themselves to each person anew, according to hisruling love. Man is such as his affection and thought are. Man is manby virtue of willing, not by virtue of knowing and understanding. Ashe is, so he sees. The marriages of the world are broken up. Interiorsassociate all in the spiritual world. Whatever the angels looked uponwas to them celestial. Each Satan appears to himself a man; to thoseas bad as he, a comely man; to the purified, a heap of carrion. Nothingcan resist states; everything gravitates; like will to like; what wecall poetic justice takes effect on the spot. We have come into a worldwhich is a living poem. Every thing is as I am. Bird and beast is notbird and beast, but emanation and effluvia of the minds and wills ofmen there present. Every one makes his own house and state. The ghostsare tormented with the fear of death, and cannot remember that theyhave died. They who are in evil and falsehood are afraid of all others.Such as have deprived themselves of charity, wander and flee; thesocieties which they approach discover their quality, and drive themaway. The covetous seem to themselves to be abiding in cells wheretheir money is deposited, and these to be infested with mice. They whoplace merit in good works seem to themselves to cut wood. "I askedsuch, if they were not wearied? They replied, that they have not yetdone work enough to merit heaven."He delivers golden sayings, which express with singular beauty theethical laws; as when he uttered that famed sentence, that, "in heaventhe angels are advancing continually to the springtime of their youth,so that the oldest angel appears the youngest:" "The more angels, themore room:" "The perfection of man is the love of use:" "Man, in hisperfect form, is heaven:" "What is from Him, is Him:" "Ends alwaysascend as nature descends:" And the truly poetic account of the writingin the inmost heaven, which, as it consists of inflexions accordingto the form of heaven, can be read without instruction He almostjustifies his claim to preternatural vision, by strange insights ofthe structure of the human body and mind. "It is never permitted toany one, in heaven, to stand behind another and look at the back ofhis head; for then the influx which is from the Lord is disturbed."The angels, from the sound of the voice, know a man's love; from thearticulation of the sound, his wisdom; and from the sense of the words,his science.In the "Conjugal Love," he has unfolded the science of marriage. Ofthis book, one would say, that, with the highest elements, it hasfailed of success. It came near to be the Hymn of Love, which Platoattempted in the "Banquet;" the love, which, Dante says, Casella sangamong the angels in Paradise; and which, as rightly celebrated, in itsgenesis, fruition, and effect, might well entrance the souls, as itwould lay open the genesis of all institutions, customs, and manners.The book had been grand, if the Hebraism had been omitted, and the lawstated without Gothicism, as ethics, and with that scope for ascensionof state which the nature of things requires. It is a fine Platonicdevelopment of the science of marriage; teaching that sex is universal,and not local; virility in the male qualifying every organ, act, andthought; and the feminine in woman. Therefore, in the real or spiritualworld, the nuptial union is not momentary, but incessant and total;and chastity not a local, but a universal virtue; unchastity beingdiscovered as much in the trading, or planting, or speaking, orphilosophizing, as in generation; and that, though the virgins he sawin heaven were beautiful, the wives were incomparably more beautiful,and went on increasing in beauty evermore.Yet Swedenborg, after his mode, pinned his theory to a temporary form.He exaggerates the circumstance of marriage; and, though he finds falsemarriages on the earth, fancies a wiser choice in heaven. But ofprogressive souls, all loves and friendships are momentary. Do youlove me? means, Do you see the same truth? If you do, we are happywith the same happiness; but presently one of us passes into theperception of new truth;--we are divorced, and no tension in naturecan hold us to each other. I know how delicious is this cup of love,--Iexisting for you, you existing for me; but it is a child's clingingto his toy; an attempt to eternize the fireside and nuptial chamber;to keep the picture-alphabet through which our first lessons areprettily conveyed. The Eden of God is bare and grand: like the outdoorlandscape, remembered from the evening fireside, it seems cold anddesolate, whilst you cower over the coals; but, once abroad again, wepity those who can forego the magnificence of nature, for candle-lightand cards. Perhaps the true subject of the "Conjugal Love" isconversation, whose laws are profoundly eliminated. It is false, ifliterally applied to marriage. For God is the bride or bridegroom ofthe soul. Heaven is not the pairing of two, but the communion of allsouls. We meet, and dwell an instant under the temple of one thought,and part as though we parted not, to join another thought in otherfellowships of joy. So far from there being anything divine in the lowand proprietary sense of, Do you love me? it is only when you leaveand lose me, by casting yourself on a sentiment which is higher thanboth of us, that I draw near, and find myself at your side; and I amrepelled, if you fix your eye on me, and demand love. In fact, in thespiritual world, we change sexes every moment. You love the worth inme; then I am your husband: but it is not me, but the worth, that fixesthe love; and that worth is a drop of the ocean of worth that is beyondme. Meantime, I adore the greater worth in another, and so become hiswife. He aspires to a higher worth in another spirit, and is wife ofreceiver of that influence.Whether a self-inquisitorial habit, that he grew into, from jealousyof the sins to which men of thought are liable, he has acquired, indisentangling and demonstrating that particular form of moral disease,an acumen which no conscience can resist. I refer to his feeling ofthe profanation of thinking to what is good "from scientifics." "Toreason about faith, is to doubt and deny." He was painfully alive tothe difference between knowing and doing, and this sensibility isincessantly expressed. Philosophers are, therefore, vipers, cockatrices,asps, hemorrhoids, presters, and flying serpents; literary men areconjurers and charlatans.But this topic suggests a sad afterthought, that here we find the seatof his own pain. Possibly Swedenborg paid the penalty of introvertedfaculties. Success, or a fortunate genius, seems to depend on a happyadjustment of heart and brain; on a due proportion, hard to hit, ofmoral and mental power, which, perhaps, obeys the law of those chemicalratios which make a proportion in volumes necessary to combination,as when gases will combine in certain fixed rates, but not at any rate.It is hard to carry a full cup: and this man, profusely endowed inheart and mind, early fell into dangerous discord with himself. In hisAnimal Kingdom, he surprises us, by declaring that he loved analysis,and not synthesis; and now, after his fiftieth year, he falls intojealousy of his intellect; and, though aware that truth is not solitary,nor is goodness solitary, but both must ever mix and marry, he makeswar on his mind, takes the part of the conscience against it, and, onall occasions, traduces and blasphemes it. The violence is instantlyavenged. Beauty is disgraced, love is unlovely, when truth, the halfpart of heaven, is denied, as much as when a bitterness in men oftalent leads to satire, and destroys the judgment. He is wise, butwise in his own despite. There is an air of infinite grief, and thesound of wailing, all over and through this lurid universe. A vampyresits in the seat of the prophet, and turns with gloomy appetite to theimages of pain. Indeed, a bird does not more readily weave its nest,or a mole bore into the ground, than this seer of souls substructs anew hell and pit, each more abominable than the last, round every newcrew of offenders. He was let down through a column that seemed ofbrass, but it was formed of angelic spirits, that he might descendsafely amongst the unhappy, and witness the vastation of souls; andheard there, for a long continuance, their lamentations; he saw theirtormentors, who increase and strain pangs to infinity; he saw the hellof the jugglers, the hell of the assassins, the hell of the lascivious;the hell of robbers, who kill and boil men; the infernal tun of thedeceitful; the excrementitious hells; the hell of the revengeful, whosefaces resembled a round, broad-cake, and their arms rotate like awheel. Except Rabelais and Dean Swift, nobody ever had such scienceof filth and corruption.These books should be used with caution. It is dangerous to sculpturethese evanescing images of thought. True in transition, they becomefalse if fixed. It requires, for his just apprehension, almost a geniusequal to his own. But when his visions become the stereotyped languageof multitudes of persons, of all degrees of age and capacity, they areperverted. The wise people of the Greek race were accustomed to leadthe most intelligent and virtuous young men, as part of their education,through the Eleusinian mysteries, wherein, with much pomp andgraduation, the highest truths known to ancient wisdom were taught.An ardent and contemplative young man, at eighteen or twenty years,might read once these books of Swedenborg, these mysteries of love andconscience, and then throw them aside forever. Genius is ever hauntedby similar dreams, when the hells and the heavens are opened to it.But these pictures are to be held as mystical, that is, as a quitearbitrary and accidental picture of the truth--not as the truth. Anyother symbol would be as good: then this is safely seen.Swedenborg's system of the world wants central spontaneity; it isdynamic, not vital, and lacks power to generate life. There is noindividual in it. The universe is a gigantic crystal, all those atomsand laminae lie in uninterrupted order, and with unbroken unity, butcold and still. What seems an individual and a will, is none. Thereis an immense chain of intermediation, extending from center toextremes, which bereaves every agency of all freedom and character.The universe, in his poem, suffers under a magnetic sleep, and onlyreflects the mind of the magnetizer. Every thought comes into eachmind by influence from a society of spirits that surround it, and intothese from a higher society, and so on. All his types mean the samefew things. All his figures speak one speech. All his interlocutorsSwedenborgize. Be they who they may, to this complexion must they comeat last. This Charon ferries them all over in his boat; kings,counselors, cavaliers, doctors, Sir Isaac Newton, Sir Hans Sloane,King George II., Mahomet, or whosoever, and all gather one grimnessof hue and style. Only when Cicero comes by, our gentle seer sticksa little at saying he talked with Cicero, and, with a touch of humanrelenting, remarks, "one whom it was given me to believe was Cicero;"and when the _soi disant_ Roman opens his mouth, Rome and eloquencehave ebbed away,--it is plain theologic Swedenborg, like the rest. Hisheavens and hells are dull; fault of want of individualism. Thethousand-fold relation of men is not there. The interest that attachesin nature to each man, because he is right by his wrong, and wrong byhis right, because he defies all dogmatizing and classification, somany allowances, and contingencies, and futurities, are to be takeninto account, strong by his vices, often paralyzed by hisvirtues,--sinks into entire sympathy with his society. This want reactsto the center of the system. Though the agency of "the Lord" is inevery line referred to by name, it never becomes alive. There is nolustre in that eye which gazes from the center, and which should vivifythe immense dependency of beings.The vice of Swedenborg's mind is its theologic determination. Nothingwith him has the liberality of universal wisdom, but we are always ina church. That Hebrew muse, which taught the lore of right and wrongto man, had the same excess of influence for him, it has had for thenations. The mode, as well as the essence, was sacred. Palestine isever the more valuable as a chapter in universal history, and ever theless an available element in education. The genius of Swedenborg,largest of all modern souls in this department of thought, wasteditself in the endeavor to reanimate and conserve what had alreadyarrived at its natural term, and, in the great secular Providence, wasretiring from its prominence, before western modes of thought andexpression. Swedenborg and Behmen both failed by attaching themselvesto the Christian symbol, instead of to the moral sentiment, whichcarries innumerable christianities, humanities, divinities, in itsbosom.The excess of influence shows itself in the incongruous importationof a foreign rhetoric. "What have I to do," asks the impatient reader,"with jasper and sardonyx, beryl and chalcedony; what with arks andpassovers, ephahs and ephods; what with lepers and emerods; what withheave-offerings and unleavened bread; chariots of fire, dragons crownedand horned, behemoth and unicorn? Good for orientals, these are nothingto me. The more learning you bring to explain them, the more glaringthe impertinence. The more coherent and elaborate the system, the lessI like it. I say, with the Spartan, 'Why do you speak so much to thepurpose, of that which is nothing to the purpose?' My learning is suchas God gave me in my birth and habit, in the delight and study of myeyes, and not of another man's. Of all absurdities, this of someforeigner, purposing to take away my rhetoric, and substitute his own,and amuse me with pelican and stork, instead of thrush and robin;palm-trees and shittim-wood, instead of sassafras and hickory,--seemsthe most needless." Locke said, "God, when he makes the prophet, doesnot unmake the man." Swedenborg's history points the remark. The parishdisputes, in the Swedish church, between the friends and foes of Lutherand Melancthon, concerning "faith alone," and "works alone," intrudethemselves into his speculations upon the economy of the universe, andof the celestial societies. The Lutheran bishop's son, for whom theheavens are opened, so that he sees with eyes, and in the richestsymbolic forms, the awful truth of things, and utters again, in hisbooks, as under a heavenly mandate, the indisputable secrets of moralnature,--with all these grandeurs resting upon him, remains the Lutheranbishop's son; his judgments are those of a Swedish polemic, and hisvast enlargements purchased by adamantine limitations. He carries hiscontroversial memory with him, in his visits to the souls. He is likeMichel Angelo, who, in his frescoes, put the cardinal who had offendedhim to roast under a mountain of devils; or, like Dante, who avenged,in vindictive melodies, all his private wrongs; or, perhaps still morelike Montaigne's parish priest, who, if a hailstorm passes over thevillage, thinks the day of doom has come, and the cannibals alreadyhave got the pip. Swedenborg confounds us not less with the pains ofMelancthon, and Luther, and Wolfius, and his own books, which headvertises among the angels.Under the same theologic cramp, many of his dogmas are bound. Hiscardinal position in morals is, that evils should be shunned as sins.But he does not know what evil is, or what good is, who thinks anyground remains to be occupied, after saying that evil is to be shunnedas evil. I doubt not he was led by the desire to insert the elementof personality of Deity. But nothing is added. One man, you say, dreadscrysipelas,--show him that this dread is evil: or, one dreadshell,--show him that dread is evil. He who loves goodness, harborsangels, reveres reverence, and lives with God. The less we have to dowith our sins, the better. No man can afford to waste his moments incompunctions. "That is active duty," say the Hindoos, "which is notfor our bondage; that is knowledge, which is for our liberation; allother duty is good only unto weariness."Another dogma, growing out of this pernicious theologic limitation,is this Inferno. Swedenborg has devils. Evil, according to oldphilosophers, is good in the making. That pure malignity can exist,is the extreme proposition of unbelief. It is not to be entertainedby a rational agent; it is atheism; it is the last profanation.Euripides rightly said,--"Goodness and being in the gods are one; He who imputes ill to themmakes them none."To what a painful perversion had Gothic theology arrived, thatSwedenborg admitted no conversion for evil spirits! But the divineeffort is never relaxed; the carrion in the sun will convert itselfto grass and flowers; and man, though in brothels, or jails, or ongibbets, is on his way to all that is good and true. Burns, with thewild humor of his apostrophe to "poor old Nickie Ben,""O wad ye tak a thought, and mend!"has the advantage of the vindictive theologian. Everything issuperficial, and perishes, but love and truth only. The largest isalways the truest sentiment, and we feel the more generous spirit ofthe Indian Vishnu,-"I am the same to all mankind. There is not one whois worthy of my love or hatred. They who serve me with adoration,--Iam in them, and they in me. If one whose ways are altogether evil,serve me alone, he is as respectable as the just man; he is altogetherwell employed; he soon becometh of a virtuous spirit, and obtainetheternal happiness."For the anomalous pretension of Revelations of the other world,--onlyhis probity and genius can entitle it to any serious regard. Hisrevelations destroy their credit by running into detail. If a man say,that the Holy Ghost hath informed him that the Last Judgment (or thelast of the judgments) took place in 1757; or, that the Dutch, in theother world, live in a heaven by themselves, and the English in aheaven by themselves; I reply, that the Spirit which is holy, isreserved, taciturn, and deals in laws. The rumors of ghosts andhobgoblins gossip and tell fortunes. The teachings of the high Spiritare abstemious, and, in regard to particulars, negative. Socrates'Genius did not advise him to act or to find, but if he proposed to dosomewhat not advantageous, it dissuaded him. "What God is," he said,"I know not; what he is not I know." The Hindoos have denominated theSupreme Being, the "Internal Check." The illuminated Quakers explainedtheir Light, not as somewhat which leads to any action, but it appearsas an obstruction to anything unfit. But the right examples are privateexperiences, which are absolutely at one on this point. Strictlyspeaking, Swedenborg's revelation is a confounding of planes,--a capitaloffence in so learned a categorist. This is to carry the law of surfaceinto the plane of substance, to carry individualism and its fopperiesinto the realm of essences and generals, which is dislocation andchaos.The secret of heaven is kept from age to age. No imprudent, no sociableangel ever dropt an early syllable to answer the longings of saints,the fears of mortals. We should have listened on our knees to anyfavorite, who, by stricter obedience, had brought his thoughts intoparallelism with the celestial currents, and could hint to human earsthe scenery and circumstance of the newly parted soul. But it is certainthat it must tally with what is best in nature. It must not be inferiorin tone to the already known works of the artist who sculptures theglobes of the firmament, and writes the moral law. It must be fresherthan rainbows, stabler than mountains, agreeing with flowers, withtides, and the rising and setting of autumnal stars. Melodious poetsshall be hoarse as street ballads, when once the penetrating key-noteof nature and spirit is sounded,--the earth-beat, sea-beat, heart-beatwhich makes the tune to which the sun rolls, and the globule of blood,and the sap of trees.In this mood, we hear the rumor that the seer has arrived, and histale is told. But there is no beauty, no heaven: for angels, goblins.The sad muse loves night and death, and the pit. His Inferno ismesmeric. His spiritual world bears the same relation to thegenerosities and joys of truth, of which human souls have already madeus cognizant, as a man's bad dreams bear to his ideal life. It isindeed very like, in its endless power of lurid pictures, to thephenomena of dreaming, which nightly turns many an honest gentleman,benevolent but dyspeptic, into a wretch, skulking like a dog about theouter yards and kennels of creation. When he mounts into the heavens,I do not hear its language. A man should not tell me that he has walkedamong the angels; his proof is, that his eloquence makes me one. Shallthe archangels be less majestic and sweet than the figures that haveactually walked the earth? These angels that Swedenborg paints giveus no very high idea of their discipline and culture; they are allcountry parsons; their heaven is a _fete champetre_, and evangelicalpicnic, or French distribution of prizes to virtuous peasants. Strange,scholastic, didactic, passionless, bloodless man, who denotes classes ofsouls as a botanist disposes of a carex, and visits doleful hells as astratum of chalk or hornblende! He has no sympathy. He goes up and downthe world of men, a modern Rhadamanthus in gold-headed cane and peruke,and with nonchalance, and the air of a referee, distributing souls. Thewarm, many-weathered, passionate-peopled world is to him a grammar ofhieroglyphs, or an emblematic freemason's procession. How different isJacob Behmen! he is tremulous with emotion, and listens awe-struck, withthe gentlest humanity, to the Teacher whose lessons he conveys; and whenhe asserts that, "in some sort, love is greater than God," his heartbeats so high that the thumping against his leathern coat is audibleacross the centuries. 'Tis a great difference. Behmen is healthily andbeautifully wise, notwithstanding the mystical narrowness andincommunicableness. Swedenborg is disagreeably wise, and, with all hisaccumulated gifts, paralyzes and repels.It is the best sign of a great nature, that it opens a foreground,and, like the breath of morning landscapes, invites us onward.Swedenborg is retrospective, nor can we divest him of his mattock andshroud. Some minds are forever restrained from descending into nature;others are forever prevented from ascending out of it. With a forceof many men, he could never break the umbilical cord which held himto nature, and he did not rise to the platform of pure genius.It is remarkable that this man, who, by his perception of symbols, sawthe poetic construction of things, and the primary relation of mindto matter, remained entirely devoid of the whole apparatus of poeticexpression, which that perception creates. He knew the grammar andrudiments of the Mother-Tongue,--how could he not read off one straininto music? Was he like Saadi, who, in his vision, designed to fillhis lap with the celestial flowers, as presents for his friends; butthe fragrance of the roses so intoxicated him, that the skirt droppedfrom his hands? or, is reporting a breach of the manners of thatheavenly society? or, was it that he saw the vision intellectually,and hence that chiding of the intellectual that pervades his books?Be it as it may, his books have no melody, no emotion, no humor, norelief to the dead prosaic level. In his profuse and accurate imageryis no pleasure, for there is no beauty. We wander forlorn in a lack-lustre landscape. No bird ever sang in all these gardens of the dead.The entire want of poetry in so transcendent a mind betokens thedisease, and, like a hoarse voice in a beautiful person, is a kind ofwarning. I think, sometimes, he will not be read longer. His greatname will turn a sentence. His books have become a monument. His laurelsso largely mixed with cypress, a charnel-breath so mingles with thetemple incense, that boys and maids will shun the spot.Yet, in this immolation of genius and fame at the shrine of conscience,is a merit sublime beyond praise. He lived to purpose: he gave averdict. He elected goodness as the clue to which the soul must clingin all this labyrinth of nature. Many opinions conflict as to the truecenter. In the shipwreck, some cling to running rigging, some to caskand barrel, some to spars, some to mast; the pilot chooses withscience,--I plant myself here; all will sink before this; "he comesto land who sails with me." Do not rely on heavenly favor, or oncompassion to folly, or on prudence, on common sense, the old usageand main chance of men; nothing can keep you,--not fate, nor health,nor admirable intellect; none can keep you, but rectitude only,rectitude forever and ever!--and, with a tenacity that never swervedin all his studies, inventions, dreams, he adheres to this brave choice.I think of him as of some transmigratory votary of Indian legend, whosays, "Though I be dog, or jackal, or pismire, in the last rudimentsof nature, under what integument or ferocity, I cleave to right, asthe sure ladder that leads up to man and to God."Swedenborg has rendered a double service to mankind, which is now onlybeginning to be known. By the science of experiment and use, he madehis first steps; he observed and published the laws of nature; and,ascending by just degrees, from events to their summits and causes,he was fired with piety at the harmonies he felt, and abandoned himselfto his joy and worship. This was his first service. If the glory wastoo bright for his eyes to bear, if he staggered under the trance ofdelight, the more excellent is the spectacle he saw, the realities ofbeing which beam and blaze through him, and which no infirmities ofthe prophet are suffered to obscure; and he renders a second passiveservice to men, not less than the first,--perhaps, in the great circleof being, and in the retributions of spiritual nature, not less gloriousor less beautiful to himself.IV. MONTAIGNE; OR, THE SKEPTIC.Every fact is related on one side to sensation and, on the other, tomorals. The game of thought is, on the appearance of one of these twosides, to find the other; given the upper, to find the under side.Nothing so thin, but has these two faces; and, when the observer hasseen the obverse, he turns it over to see the reverse.Life is a pitching of this penny,--heads or tails. We never tire ofthis game, because there is still a slight shudder of astonishment atthe exhibition of the other face, at the contrast of the two faces.A man is flushed with success, and bethinks himself what this goodluck signifies. He drives his bargain in the street; but it occursthat he also is bought and sold. He sees the beauty of a human face,and searches the cause of that beauty, which must be more beautiful.He builds his fortunes, maintains the laws, cherishes his children;but he asks himself, why? and whereto? This head and this tail arecalled, in the language of philosophy, Infinite and Finite; Relativeand Absolute; Apparent and Real; and many fine names beside.Each man is born with a predisposition to one or the other of thesesides of nature; and it will easily happen that men will be founddevoted to one or the other. One class has the perception of difference,and is conversant with facts and surfaces; cities and persons; and thebringing certain things to pass;--the men of talent and action. Anotherclass have the perception of identity, and are men of faith andphilosophy, men of genius.Each of these riders drives too fast. Plotinus believes only inphilosophers; Fenelon, in saints; Pindar and Byron, in poets. Read thehaughty language in which Plato and the Platonists speak of all menwho are not devoted to their own shining abstractions: other men arerats and mice. The literary class is usually proud and exclusive. Thecorrespondence of Pope and Swift describes mankind around them asmonsters; and that of Goethe and Schiller, in our own time, is scarcelymore kind.It is easy to see how this arrogance comes. The genius is a genius bythe first look he casts on any object. Is his eye creative? Does henot rest in angles and colors, but beholds the design--he will presentlyundervalue the actual object. In powerful moments, his thought hasdissolved the works of art and nature into their causes, so that theworks appear heavy and faulty. He has a conception of beauty which thesculptor cannot embody. Picture, statue, temple, railroad, steam-engine,existed first in an artist's mind, without flaw, mistake, or friction,which impair the executed models. So did the church, the state, college,court, social circle, and all the institutions. It is not strange thatthese men, remembering what they have seen and hoped of ideas, shouldaffirm disdainfully the superiority of ideas. Having at some time seenthat the happy soul will carry all the arts in power, they say, Whycumber ourselves with superfluous realizations? and, like dreamingbeggars, they assume to speak and act as if these values were alreadysubstantiated.On the other part, the men of toil and trade and luxury,--the animalworld, including the animal in the philosopher and poet also,--and thepractical world, including the painful drudgeries which are neverexcused to philosopher or poet any more than to the rest,--weigh heavilyon the other side. The trade in our streets believes in no metaphysicalcauses, thinks nothing of the force which necessitated traders and atrading planet to exist; no, but sticks to cotton, sugar, wool, andsalt. The ward meetings, on election days, are not softened by anymisgivings of the value of these ballotings. Hot life is streaming ina single direction. To the men of this world, to the animal strengthand spirits, to the men of practical power, whilst immersed in it, theman of ideas appears out of his reason. They alone have reason.Things always bring their own philosophy with them, that is, prudence.No man acquires property without acquiring with it a little arithmetic,also. In England, the richest country that ever existed, propertystands for more, compared with personal ability, than in any other.After dinner, a man believes less, denies more; verities have lostsome charm. After dinner, arithmetic is the only science; ideas aredisturbing, incendiary, follies of young men, repudiated by the solidportion of society; and a man comes to be valued by his athletic andanimal qualities. Spence relates, that Mr. Pope was with Sir GodfreyKneller one day, when his nephew, a Guinea trader, came in. "Nephew,"said Sir Godfrey, "you have the honor of seeing the two greatest menin the world." "I don't know how great men you may be," said the Guineaman, "but I don't like your looks. I have often bought a man muchbetter than both of you, all muscles and bones, for ten guineas. Thus,the men of the senses revenge themselves on the professors, and repayscorn for scorn. The first had leaped to conclusions not yet ripe, andsay more than is true; the others make themselves merry with thephilosopher, and weigh man by the pound.--They believe that mustardbites the tongue, that pepper is hot, friction-matches are incendiary,revolvers to be avoided, and suspenders hold up pantaloons; that thereis much sentiment in a chest of tea; and a man will be eloquent, ifyou give him good wine. Are you tender and scrupulous,--you must eatmore mince-pie. They hold that Luther had milk in him when he said,"Wer nicht liebt Wein, Weib, und Gesang Der bleibt ein Narr sein Lebenlang,"and when he advised a young scholar perplexed with fore-ordination andfree-will, to get well drunk. "The nerves," says Cabanis, "they arethe man." My neighbor, a jolly farmer, in the tavern bar-room, thinksthat the use of money is sure and speedy spending. "For his part," hesays, "he puts his down his neck, and gets the good of it."The inconvenience of this way of thinking is, that it runs intoindifferentism, and then into disgust. Life is eating us up. We shallbe fables presently. Keep cool: it will be all one a hundred yearshence. Life's well enough; but we shall be glad to get out of it, andthey will all be glad to have us. Why should we fret and drudge? Ourmeat will taste to-morrow as it did yesterday, and we may at last havehad enough of it. "Ah," said my languid gentleman at Oxford, "there'snothing new or true,--and no matter."With a little more bitterness, the cynic moans: our life is like anass led to market by a bundle of hay being carried before him: he seesnothing but the bundle of hay. "There is so much trouble in cominginto the world," said Lord Bolingbroke, "and so much more, as well asmeanness, in going out of it, that 'tis hardly worth while to be hereat all." I knew a philosopher of this kidney, who was accustomed brieflyto sum up his experience of human nature in saying, "Mankind is adamned rascal:" and the natural corollary is pretty sure tofollow,--"The world lives by humbug, and so will I."The abstractionist and the materialist thus mutually exasperating eachother, and the scoffer expressing the worst of materialism, therearises a third party to occupy the middle ground between these two,the skeptic, namely. He finds both wrong by being in extremes. Helabors to plant his feet, to be the beam of the balance. He will notgo beyond his card. He sees the one-sidedness of these men of thestreet; he will not be a Gibeonite; he stands for the intellectualfaculties, a cool head, and whatever serves to keep it cool; nounadvised industry, no unrewarded self-devotion, no loss of the brainsin toil. Am I an ox, or a dray?--You are both in extremes, he says.You that will have all solid, and a world of pig-lead, deceiveyourselves grossly. You believe yourselves rooted and grounded onadamant; and, yet, if we uncover the last facts of our knowledge, youare spinning like bubbles in a river, you know not whither or whence,and you are bottomed and capped and wrapped in delusions.Neither will he be betrayed to a book, and wrapped in a gown. Thestudious class are their own victims; they are thin and pale, theirfeet are cold, their heads are hot, the night is without sleep, theday a fear of interruption,--pallor, squalor, hunger, and egotism. Ifyou come near them, and see what conceits they entertain,--they areabstractionists, and spend their days and nights in dreaming somedreams; in expecting the homage of society to some precious schemebuilt on a truth, but destitute of proportion in its presentment, ofjustness in its application, and of all energy of will in the schemerto embody and vitalize it.But I see plainly, he says, that I cannot see. I know that humanstrength is not in extremes, but in avoiding extremes. I, at least,will shun the weakness of philosophizing beyond my depth. What is theuse of pretending to powers we have not? What is the use of pretendingto assurances we have not, respecting the other life? Why exaggeratethe power of virtue? Why be an angel before your time? These strings,wound up too high, will snap. If there is a wish for immortality, andno evidence, why not say just that? If there are conflicting evidences,why not state them? If there is not ground for a candid thinker tomake up his mind, yea or nay,--why not suspend the judgment? I wearyof these dogmatizers. I tire of these hacks of routine, who deny thedogmas. I neither affirm nor deny. I stand here to try the case. I amhere to consider,--to consider how it is. I will try to keep the balancetrue. Of what use to take the chair, and glibly rattle off theoriesof societies, religion, and nature, when I know that practicalobjections lie in the way, insurmountable by me and by my mates? Whyso talkative in public, when each of my neighbors can pin me to myseat by arguments I cannot refute? Why pretend that life is so simplea game, when we know how subtle and elusive the Proteus is? Why thinkto shut up all things in your narrow coop, when we know there are notone or two only, but ten, twenty, a thousand things, and unlike? Whyfancy that you have all the truth in your keeping? There is much tosay on all sides.Who shall forbid a wise skepticism, seeing that there is no practicalquestion on which anything more than an approximate solution can behad? Is not marriage an open question when it is alleged, from thebeginning of the world, that such as are in the institution wish toget out, and such as are out wish to get in? And the reply of Socrates,to him who asked whether he should choose a wife, still remainsreasonable, "that, whether he should choose one or not, he would repentit." Is not the state a question? All society is divided in opinionon the subject of the state. Nobody loves it; great numbers dislikeit, and suffer conscientious scruples to allegiance: and the onlydefense set up, is, the fear of doing worse in disorganizing. Is itotherwise with the church? Or, to put any of the questions which touchmankind nearest,--shall the young man aim at a leading part in law,in politics, in trade? It will not be pretended that a success ineither of these kinds is quite coincident with what is best and inmostin his mind. Shall he, then, cutting the stays that hold him fast tothe social state, put out to sea with no guidance but his genius? Thereis much to say on both sides. Remember the open question between thepresent order of "competition," and the friends of "attractive andassociated labor." The generous minds embrace the proposition of laborshared by all; it is the only honesty; nothing else is safe. It isfrom the poor man's hut alone, that strength and virtue come; and yet,on the other side, it is alleged that labor impairs the form, andbreaks the spirit of man, and the laborers cry unanimously, "We haveno thoughts." Culture, how indispensable! I cannot forgive you thewant of accomplishment; and yet, culture will instantly destroy thatchiefest beauty of spontaneousness. Excellent is culture for a savage;but once let him read in the book, and he is no longer able not tothink of Plutarch's heroes. In short, since true fortitude ofunderstanding consists "in not letting what we know be embarrassed bywhat we do not know," we ought to secure those advantages which we cancommand, and not risk them by clutching after the airy and unattainable.Come, no chimeras! Let us go abroad; let us mix in affairs; let uslearn, and get, and have, and climb. "Men are a sort of moving plants,and, like trees, receive a great part of their nourishment from theair. If they keep too much at home, they pine." Let us have a robust,manly life; let us know what we know, for certain; what we have, letit be solid, and seasonable, and our own. A world in the hand is worthtwo in the bush. Let us have to do with real men and women, and notwith skipping ghosts.This, then, is the right ground of the skeptic,--this of consideration,of self-containing; not at all of unbelief; not at all of universaldenying, nor of universal doubting,--doubting even that he doubts;least of all, of scoffing and profligate jeering at all that is stableand good. These are no more his moods than are those of religion andphilosophy. He is the considerer, the prudent, taking in sail, countingstock, husbanding his means, believing that a man has too many enemies,than that he can afford to be his own; that we cannot give ourselvestoo many advantages, in this unequal conflict, with powers so vast andunweariable ranged on one side, and this little, conceited, vulnerablepopinjay that a man is, bobbing up and down into every danger, on theother. It is a position taken up for better defense, as of more safety,and one that can be maintained; and it is one of more opportunity andrange; as, when we build a house, the rule is, to set it not too highnor too low, under the wind, but out of the dirt.The philosophy we want is one of fluxions and mobility. The Spartanand Stoic schemes are too stark and stiff for our occasion. A theoryof Saint John, and of non-resistance, seems, on the other hand, toothin and aerial. We want some coat woven of elastic steel, stout asthe first, and limber as the second. We want a ship in these billowswe inhabit. An angular, dogmatic house would be rent to chips andsplinters, in this storm of many elements. No, it must be tight, andfit to the form of man, to live at all; as a shell is the architectureof a house founded on the sea. The soul of man must be the type of ourscheme, just as the body of man is the type after which a dwelling-houseis built. Adaptiveness is the peculiarity of human nature. We aregolden averages, volitant stabilities, compensated or periodic errors,houses founded on the sea. The wise skeptic wishes to have a near viewof the best game, and the chief players; what is best in the planet;art and nature, places and events, but mainly men. Everything that isexcellent in mankind,--a form of grace, an arm of iron, lips ofpersuasion, a brain of resources, every one skilful to play and win,--hewill see and judge.The terms of admission to this spectacle are, that he have a certainsolid and intelligible way of living of his own; some method ofanswering the inevitable needs of human life; proof that he has playedwith skill and success; that he has evinced the temper, stoutness, andthe range of qualities which, among his contemporaries and countrymen,entitle him to fellowship and trust. For, the secrets of life are notshown except to sympathy and likeness. Men do not confide themselvesto boys, or coxcombs, or pedants, but to their peers. Some wiselimitation, as the modern phrase is; some condition between theextremes, and having itself a positive quality; some stark andsufficient man, who is not salt or sugar, but sufficiently related tothe world to do justice to Paris or London, and, at the same time, avigorous and original thinker, whom cities cannot overawe, but whouses them,--is the fit person to occupy this ground of speculation.These qualities meet in the character of Montaigne. And yet, since thepersonal regard which I entertain for Montaigne may be unduly great,I will, under the shield of this prince of egotists, offer, as anapology for electing him as the representative of skepticism, a wordor two to explain how my love began and grew for this admirable gossip.A single odd volume of Cotton's translation of the Essays remained tome from my father's library, when a boy. It lay long neglected, until,after many years, when I was newly escaped from college, I read thebook, and procured the remaining volumes. I remember the delight andwonder in which I lived with it. It seemed to me as if I had myselfwritten the book, in some former life, so sincerely it spoke to mythought and experience. It happened, when in Paris, in 1833, that, inthe cemetery of Pere le Chaise, I came to a tomb of Augustus Collignon,who died in 1830, aged sixty-eight years, and who, said the monument,"lived to do right, and had formed himself to virtue on the Essays ofMontaigne." Some years later, I became acquainted with an accomplishedEnglish poet, John Sterling; and, in prosecuting my correspondence,I found that, from a love of Montaigne, he had made a pilgrimage tohis chateau, still standing near Castellan, in Perigord, and, aftertwo hundred and fifty years, had copied from the walls of his librarythe inscriptions which Montaigne had written there. That Journal ofMr. Sterling's, published in the Westminster Review, Mr. Hazlitt hasreprinted in the Prolegomenae to his edition of the Essays. I heardwith pleasure that one of the newly-discovered autographs of WilliamShakspeare was in a copy of Florio's translation of Montaigne. It isthe only book which we certainly know to have been in the poet'slibrary. And, oddly enough, the duplicate copy of Florio, which theBritish Museum purchased, with a view of protecting the Shakspeareautograph (as I was informed in the Museum), turned out to have theautograph of Ben Jonson in the fly-leaf. Leigh Hunt relates of LordByron, that Montaigne was the only great writer of past times whom heread with avowed satisfaction. Other coincidences, not needful to bementioned here, concurred to make this old Gascon still new and immortalfor me.In 1571, on the death of his father, Montaigne, then thirty-eight yearsold, retired from the practice of law, at Bordeaux, and settled himselfon his estate. Though he had been a man of pleasure, and sometimes acourtier, his studious habits now grew on him, and he loved the compass,staidness, and independence of the country gentleman's life. He tookup his economy in good earnest, and made his farms yield the most.Downright and plain-dealing, and abhorring to be deceived or todeceive, he was esteemed in the country for his sense and probity. Inthe civil wars of the League, which converted every house into a fort,Montaigne kept his gates open, and his house without defense. Allparties freely came and went, his courage and honor being universallyesteemed. The neighboring lords and gentry brought jewels and papersto him for safekeeping. Gibbon reckons, in these bigoted times, buttwo men of liberality in France,--Henry IV. and Montaigne.Montaigne is the frankest and honestest of all writers. His Frenchfreedom runs into grossness; but he has anticipated all censures bythe bounty of his own confessions. In his times, books were writtento one sex only, and almost all were written in Latin; so that, in ahumorist, a certain nakedness of statement was permitted, which ourmanners, of a literature addressed equally to both sexes, do not allow.But, though a biblical plainness, coupled with a most uncanonicallevity, may shut his pages to many sensitive readers, yet the offenceis superficial. He parades it: he makes the most of it; nobody canthink or say worse of him than he does. He pretends to most of thevices; and, if there be any virtue in him, he says, it got in bystealth. There is no man, in his opinion, who has not deserved hangingfive or six times; and he pretends no exception in his own behalf."Five or six as ridiculous stories," too, he says, "can be told of me,as of any man living." But, with all this really superfluous frankness,the opinion of an invincible probity grows into every reader's mind."When I the most strictly and religiously confess myself, I find thatthe best virtue I have has in it some tincture of vice; and I am afraidthat Plato, in his purest virtue (I, who am as sincere and perfect alover of virtue of that stamp as any other whatever), if he hadlistened, and laid his ear close to himself, would have heard somejarring sound of human mixture; but faint and remote, and only to beperceived by himself."Here is an impatience and fastidiousness at color or pretense of anykind. He has been in courts so long as to have conceived a furiousdisgust at appearances; he will indulge himself with a little cursingand swearing; he will talk with sailors and gypsies, use flash andstreet ballads; he has stayed indoors till he is deadly sick; he willto the open air, though it rain bullets. He has seen too much ofgentlemen of the long robe, until he wishes for cannibals; and is sonervous, by factitious life, that he thinks, the more barbarous manis, the better he is. He likes his saddle. You may read theology, andgrammar, and metaphysics elsewhere. Whatever you get here, shall smackof the earth and of real life, sweet, or smart, or stinging. He makesno hesitation to entertain you with the records of his disease; andhis journey to Italy is quite full of that matter. He took and keptthis position of equilibrium. Over his name, he drew an emblematicpair of scales, and wrote, _Que sais-je?_ under it. As I look athis effigy opposite the title-page, I seem to hear him say, "You mayplay old Poz, if you will; you may rail and exaggerate,--I stand herefor truth, and will not, for all the states, and churches, and revenues,and personal reputations of Europe, overstate the dry fact, as I seeit; I will rather mumble and prose about what I certainly know,--myhouse and barns; my father, my wife, and my tenants; my old lean baldpate; my knives and forks; what meats I eat, and what drinks I prefer;and a hundred straws just as ridiculous,--than I will write, with afine crow-quill, a fine romance. I like gray days, and autumn andwinter weather. I am gray and autumnal myself, and think an undress,and old shoes that do not pinch my feet, and old friends who do notconstrain me, and plain topics where I do not need to strain myselfand pump my brains, the most suitable. Our condition as men is riskyand ticklish enough. One cannot be sure of himself and his fortune anhour, but he may be whisked off into some pitiable or ridiculous plight.Why should I vapor and play the philosopher, instead of ballasting,the best I can, this dancing balloon? So, at least, I live withincompass, keep myself ready for action, and can shoot the gulf, at last,with decency. If there be anything farcical in such a life, the blameis not mine; let it lie at fate's and nature's door."The Essays, therefore, are an entertaining soliloquy on every randomtopic that comes into his head; treating everything without ceremony,yet with masculine sense. There have been men with deeper insight;but, one would say, never a man with such abundance of thoughts; heis never dull, never insincere, and has the genius to make the readercare for all that he cares for.The sincerity and marrow of the man reaches to his sentences. I knownot anywhere the book that seems less written. It is the language ofconversation transferred to a book. Cut these words, and they wouldbleed; they are vascular and alive. One has the same pleasure in itthat we have in listening to the necessary speech of men about theirwork, when any unusual circumstance give momentary importance to thedialogue. For blacksmiths and teamsters do not trip in their speech;it is a shower of bullets. It is Cambridge men who correct themselves,and begin again at every half-sentence, and, moreover, will pun, andrefine too much, and swerve from the matter to the expression. Montaignetalks with shrewdness, knows the world, and books, and himself, anduses the positive degree; never shrieks, or protests, or prays; noweakness, no convulsion, no superlative; does not wish to jump out ofhis skin, or play any antics, or annihilate space or time; but is stoutand solid; tastes every moment of the day; likes pain, because it makeshim feel himself, and realize things; as we pinch ourselves to knowthat we are awake. He keeps the plain; he rarely mounts or sinks; likesto feel solid ground, and the stones underneath. His writing has noenthusiasms, no aspiration; contented, self-respecting, and keepingthe middle of the road. There is but one exception,--in his love forSocrates. In speaking of him, for once his cheek flushes, and his stylerises to passion.Montaigne died of a quinsy, at the age of sixty, in 1592. When he cameto die, he caused the mass to be celebrated in his chamber. At the ageof thirty-three, he had been married. "But," he says, "might I havehad my own will, I would not have married Wisdom herself, if she wouldhave had me; but 'tis to much purpose to evade it, the common customand use of life will have it so. Most of my actions are guided byexample, not choice." In the hour of death he gave the same weight tocustom. _Que sais-je?_ What do I know.This book of Montaigne the world has endorsed, by translating it intoall tongues, and printing seventy-five editions of it in Europe; andthat, too, a circulation somewhat chosen, namely, among courtiers,soldiers, princes, men of the world, and men of wit and generosity.Shall we say that Montaigne has spoken wisely, and given the right andpermanent expression of the human mind, on the conduct of life?We are natural believers. Truth, or the connection between cause andeffect, alone interests us. We are persuaded that a thread runs throughall things; all worlds are strung on it, as beads; and men, and events,and life, come to us, only because of that thread; they pass and repass,only that we may know the direction and continuity of that line. Abook or statement which goes to show that there is no line, but randomand chaos, a calamity out of nothing, a prosperity and no account ofit, a hero born from a fool, a fool from a hero,--dispirits us. Seenor unseen, we believe the tie exists. Talent makes counterfeit ties;genius finds the real ones. We hearken to the man of science, becausewe anticipate the sequence in natural phenomena which he uncovers. Welove whatever affirms, connects, preserves; and dislike what scattersor pulls down. One man appears whose nature is to all men's eyesconserving and constructive; his presence supposes a well-orderedsociety, agriculture, trade, large institutions, and empire. If thesedid not exist, they would begin to exist through his endeavors.Therefore, he cheers and comforts men, who feel all this in him veryreadily. The nonconformist and the rebel say all manner of unanswerablethings against the existing republic, but discover to our sense noplan of house or state of their own. Therefore, though the town, andstate, and way of living, which our counselor contemplated, might bea very modest or musty prosperity, yet men rightly go for him, andreject the reformer, so long as he comes only with axe and crowbar.But though we are natural conservers and causationists, and reject asour, dumpish unbelief, the skeptical class, which Montaigne represents,have reason, and every man, at some time, belongs to it. Every superiormind will pass through this domain of equilibration,--I should rathersay, will know how to avail himself of the checks and balances innature, as a natural weapon against the exaggeration and formalism ofbigots and blockheads.Skepticism is the attitude assumed by the student in relation to theparticulars which society adores, but which he sees to be reverentonly in their tendency and spirit. The ground occupied by the skepticis the vestibule of the temple. Society does not like to have anybreath of question blown on the existing order. But the interrogationof custom at all points is an inevitable stage in the growth of everysuperior mind, and is the evidence of its perception of the flowingpower which remains itself in all changes.The superior mind will find itself equally at odds with the evils ofsociety, and with the projects that are offered to relieve them. Thewise skeptic is a bad citizen; no conservative; he sees the selfishnessof property, and the drowsiness of institutions. But neither is he fitto work with any democratic party that ever was constituted; for partieswish every one committed, and he penetrates the popular patriotism.His politics are those of the "Soul's Errand" of Sir Walter Raleigh;or of Krishna, in the Bhagavat, "There is none who is worthy of mylove or hatred;" while he sentences law, physic, divinity, commerce,and custom. He is a reformer: yet he is no better member of thephilanthropic association. It turns out that he is not the championof the operative, the pauper, the prisoner, the slave. It stands inhis mind, that our life in this world is not of quite so easyinterpretation as churches and school-books say. He does not wish totake ground against these benevolences, to play the part of devil'sattorney, and blazon every doubt and sneer that darkens the sun forhim. But he says, There are doubts.I mean to use the occasion, and celebrate the calendar-day of our SaintMichel de Montaigne, by counting and describing these doubts ornegations. I wish to ferret them out of their holes, and sun them alittle. We must do with them as the police do with old rogues, who areshown up to the public at the marshal's office. They will never be soformidable, when once they have been identified and registered. ButI mean honestly by them--that justice shall be done to their terrors.I shall not take Sunday objections, made up on purpose to be put down.I shall take the worst I can find, whether I can dispose of them, orthey of me.I do not press the skepticism of the materialist. I know the quadrupedopinion will not prevail. 'Tis of no importance what bats and oxenthink. The first dangerous symptom I report is, the levity of intellect;as if it were fatal to earnestness to know much. Knowledge is theknowing that we cannot know. The dull pray; the geniuses are lightmockers. How respectable is earnestness on every platform! but intellectkills it. Nay, San Carlo, my subtle and admirable friend, one of themost penetrating of men, finds that all direct ascension, even of loftypiety, leads to this ghastly insight, and sends back the votaryorphaned. My astonishing San Carlo thought the lawgivers and saintsinfected. They found the ark empty; saw, and would not tell; and triedto choke off their approaching followers, by saying, "Action, action,my dear fellows, is for you!" Bad as was to me this detection by SanCarlo, this frost in July, this blow from a brick, there was still aworse, namely, the cloy or satiety of the saints. In the mount ofvision, ere they have yet risen from their knees, they say, "We discoverthat this our homage and beatitude is partial and deformed; we mustfly for relief to the suspected and reviled Intellect, to theUnderstanding, the Mephistopheles, to the gymnastics of latent."This is hobgoblin the first; and, though it has been the subject ofmuch elegy, in our nineteenth century, from Byron, Goethe, and otherpoets of less fame, not to mention many distinguished privateobservers,--I confess it is not very affecting to my imagination; forit seems to concern the shattering of baby-houses and crockery-shops.What flutters the church of Rome, or of England, or of Geneva, or ofBoston, may yet be very far from touching any principle of faith. Ithink that the intellect and moral sentiment are unanimous; and that,though philosophy extirpates bugbears, yet it supplies the naturalchecks of vice, and polarity to the soul. I think that the wiser a manis, the more stupendous he finds the natural and moral economy, andlifts himself to a more absolute reliance.There is the power of moods, each setting at nought all but its owntissue of facts and beliefs. There is the power of complexions,obviously modifying the dispositions and sentiments. The beliefs andunbeliefs appear to be structural; and, as soon as each man attainsthe poise and vivacity which allow the whole machinery to play, hewill not need extreme examples, but will rapidly alternate all opinionsin his own life. Our life is March weather, savage and serene in onehour. We go forth austere, dedicated, believing in the iron links ofDestiny, and will not turn on our heel to save our life; but a book,or a bust, or only the sound of a name, shoots a spark through thenerves, and we suddenly believe in will: my finger-ring shall be theseal of Solomon: fate is for imbeciles: all is possible to the resolvedmind. Presently, a new experience gives a new turn to our thoughts:common sense resumes its tyranny: we say, "Well, the army, after all,is the gate to fame, manners, and poetry: and, look you,--on the whole,selfishness plants best, prunes best, makes the best commerce, and thebest citizen." Are the opinions of a man on right and wrong, on fateand causation, at the mercy of a broken sleep or an indigestion? Ishis belief in God and Duty no deeper than a stomach evidence? And whatguaranty for the permanence of his opinions? I like not the Frenchcelerity,--a new church and state once a week.--This is the secondnegation; and I shall let it pass for what it will. As far as it assertsrotation of states of mind, I suppose it suggests its own remedy,namely, in the record of larger periods. What is the mean of manystates; of all the states? Does the general voice of ages affirm anyprinciple, or is no community of sentiment discoverable in distanttimes and places? And when it shows the power of self-interest, Iaccept that as a part of the divine law, and must reconcile it withaspiration the best I can.The word Fate, or Destiny, expresses the sense of mankind, in allages,--that the laws of the world do not always befriend, but oftenhurt and crush us. Fate, in the shape of Kinde or nature, grows overus like grass. We paint Time with a scythe; Love and Fortune, blind;and Destiny, deaf. We have too little power of resistance against thisferocity which champs us up. What front can we make against theseunavoidable, victorious, maleficent forces? What can I do against theinfluence of Race, in my history? What can I do against hereditary andconstitutional habits, against scrofula, lymph, impotence? againstclimate, against barbarism, in my country? I can reason down or denyeverything, except this perpetual Belly; feed he must and will, andI cannot make him respectable.But the main resistance which the affirmative impulse finds, and oneincluding all others, is in the doctrine of the Illusionists. Thereis a painful rumor in circulation, that we have been practiced uponin all the principal performances of life, and free agency is theemptiest name. We have been sopped and drugged with the air, with food,with woman, with children, with sciences, with events which leave usexactly where they found us. The mathematics, 'tis complained, leavethe mind where they find it: so do all sciences; and so do all eventsand actions. I find a man who has passed through all the sciences, thechurl he was; and, through all the offices, learned, civil, and social,can detect the child. We are not the less necessitated to dedicatelife to them. In fact, we may come to accept it as the fixed rule andtheory of our state of education, that God is a substance, and hismethod is illusion. The eastern sages owned the goddess Yoganidra, thegreat illusory energy of Vishnu, by whom, as utter ignorance, the wholeworld is beguiled.Or, shall I state it thus?--The astonishment of life, is, the absenceof any appearance of reconciliation between the theory and practiceof life. Reason, the prized reality, the Law, is apprehended, now andthen, for a serene and profound moment, amidst the hubbub of cares andworks which have no direct bearing on it;--is then lost, for monthsor years, and again found, for an interval, to be lost again. If wecompute it in time, we may, in fifty years, have half a dozen reasonablehours. But what are these cares and works the better? A method in theworld we do not see, but this parallelism of great and little, whichnever react on each other, nor discover the smallest tendency toconverge. Experiences, fortunes, governings, readings, writings arenothing to the purpose; as when a man comes into the room, it does notappear whether he has been fed on yams or buffalo,--he has contrivedto get so much bone and fibre as he wants, out of rice or out of snow.So vast is the disproportion between the sky of law and the pismireof performance under it, that, whether he is a man of worth or a sot,is not so great a matter as we say. Shall I add, as one juggle of thisenchantment, the stunning non-intercourse law which makes cooperationimpossible? The young spirit pants to enter society. But all the waysof culture and greatness lead to solitary imprisonment. He has beenoften baulked. He did not expect a sympathy with his thought from thevillage, but he went with it to the chosen and intelligent, and foundno entertainment for it, but mere misapprehension, distaste, andscoffing. Men are strangely mistimed and misapplied; and the excellenceof each is an inflamed individualism which separates him more.There are these, and more than these diseases of thought, which ourordinary teachers do not attempt to remove. Now shall we, because agood nature inclines us to virtue's side, say, There are no doubts,--andlie for the right? Is life to be led in a brave or in a cowardly manner?and is not the satisfaction of the doubts essential to all manliness?Is the name of virtue to be a barrier to that which is virtue? Can younot believe that a man of earnest and burly habit may find small goodin tea, essays, and catechism, and want a rougher instruction, wantmen, labor, trade, farming, war, hunger, plenty, love, hatred, doubt,and terror, to make things plain to him; and has he not a right toinsist on being convinced in his own way? When he is convinced, hewill be worth the pains.Belief consists in accepting the affirmations of the soul; unbeliefin denying them. Some minds are incapable of skepticism. The doubtsthey profess to entertain are rather a civility or accommodation tothe common discourse of their company. They may well give themselvesleave to speculate, for they are secure of a return. Once admitted tothe heaven of thought, they see no relapse into night, but infiniteinvitation on the other side. Heaven is within heaven, and sky oversky, and they are encompassed with divinities. Others there are, towhom the heaven is brass, and it shuts down to the surface of theearth. It is a question of temperament, or of more or less immersionin nature. The last class must needs have a reflex or parasite faith;not a sight of realities, but an instinctive reliance on the seers andbelievers of realities. The manners and thoughts of believers astonishthem, and convince them that these have seen something which is hidfrom themselves. But their sensual habit would fix the believer to hislast position, whilst he as inevitably advances; and presently theunbeliever, for love of belief, burns the believer.Great believers are always reckoned infidels, impracticable, fantastic,atheistic, and really men of no account. The spiritualist finds himselfdriven to express his faith by a series of skepticisms. Charitablesouls come with their projects, and ask his cooperation. How can hehesitate? It is the rule of mere comity and courtesy to agree whereyou can, and to turn your sentence with something auspicious, and notfreezing and sinister. But he is forced to say, "O, these things willbe as they must be: what can you do? These particular griefs and crimesare the foliage and fruit of such trees as we see growing. It is vainto complain of the leaf or the berry: cut it off; it will bear anotherjust as bad. You must begin your cure lower down." The generositiesof the day prove an intractable element for him. The people's questionsare not his; their methods are not his; and, against all the dictatesof good nature, he is driven to say, he has no pleasure in them.Even the doctrines dear to the hope of man, of the divine Providence,and of the immortality of the soul, his neighbors cannot put thestatement so that he shall affirm it. But he denies out of more faith,and not less. He denies out of honesty. He had rather stand chargedwith the imbecility of skepticism, than with untruth. I believe, hesays, in the moral design of the universe; it exists hospitably forthe weal of the souls; but your dogmas seem to me caricatures; whyshould I make believe them? Will any say, this is cold and infidel?The wise and magnanimous will not say so. They will exult in hisfar-sighted good-will, that can abandon to the adversary all the groundof tradition and common belief, without losing a jot of strength. Itsees to the end of all transgression. George Fox saw "that there wasan ocean of darkness and death; but withal, an infinite ocean of lightand love which flowed over that of darkness."The final solution in which skepticism is lost is in the moralsentiment, which never forfeits its supremacy. All moods may be safelytried, and their weight allowed to all objections: the moral sentimentas easily outweighs them all, as any one. This is the drop whichbalances the sea. I play with the miscellany of facts, and take thosesuperficial views which we call skepticism; but I know that they willpresently appear to me in that order which makes skepticism impossible.A man of thought must feel the thought that is parent of the universe,that the masses of nature do undulate and flow.This faith avails to the whole emergency of life and objects. The worldis saturated with deity and with law. He is content with just andunjust, with sots and fools, with the triumph of folly and fraud. Hecan behold with serenity the yawning gulf between the ambition of manand his power of performance, between the demand and supply of power,which makes the tragedy of all souls.Charles Fourier announced that "the attractions of man are proportionedto his destinies;" in other words, that every desire predicts its ownsatisfaction. Yet, all experience exhibits the reverse of this; theincompetency of power is the universal grief of young and ardent minds.They accuse the divine Providence of a certain parsimony. It has shownthe heaven and earth to every child, and filled him with a desire forthe whole; a desire raging, infinite; a hunger, as of space to befilled with planets; a cry of famine, as of devils for souls. Then forthe satisfaction,--to each man is administered a single drop, a beadof dew of vital power per day,--a cup as large as space, and one dropof the water of life in it. Each man woke in the morning, with anappetite that could eat the solar system like a cake; a spirit foraction and passion without bounds; he could lay his hand on the morningstar; he could try conclusions with gravitation or chemistry; but, onthe first motion to prove his strength--hands, feet, senses, gave way,and would not serve him. He was an emperor deserted by his states, andleft to whistle by himself, or thrust into a mob of emperors, allwhistling: and still the sirens sang, "The attractions are proportionedto the destinies." In every house, in the heart of each maiden, andof each boy, in the soul of the soaring saint, this chasm is found,--between the largest promise of ideal power, and the shabby experience.The expansive nature of truth comes to our succor, elastic, not to besurrounded. Man helps himself by larger generalizations. The lessonof life is practically to generalize; to believe what the years andthe centuries say against the hours; to resist the usurpation ofparticulars; to penetrate to their catholic sense. Things seem to sayone thing, and say the reverse. The appearance is immoral; the resultis moral. Things seem to tend downward, to justify despondency, topromote rogues, to defeat the just; and, by knaves, as by martyrs, thejust cause is carried forward. Although knaves win in every politicalstruggle, although society seems to be delivered over from the handsof one set of criminals into the hands of another set of criminals,as fast as the government is changed, and the march of civilizationis a train of felonies, yet, general ends are somehow answered. Wesee, now, events forced on, which seem to retard or retrograde thecivility of ages. But the world-spirit is a good swimmer, and stormsand waves cannot drown him. He snaps his finger at laws; and so,throughout history, heaven seems to affect low and poor means. Throughthe years and the centuries, through evil agents, through toys andatoms, a great and beneficent tendency irresistibly streams.Let a man learn to look for the permanent in the mutable and fleeting;let him learn to bear the disappearance of things he was wont toreverence, without losing his reverence; let him learn that he is here,not to work, but to be worked upon; and that, though abyss open underabyss, and opinion displace opinion, all are at last contained in theEternal cause.--  "If my bark sink, 'tis to another sea."V. SHAKSPEARE; OR, THE POET.Great men are more distinguished by range and extent than byoriginality. If we require the originality which consists in weaving,like a spider, their web from their own bowels; in finding clay, andmaking bricks and building the house, no great men are original. Nordoes valuable originality consist in unlikeness to other men. The herois in the press of knights, and the thick of events; and, seeing whatmen want, and sharing their desire, he adds the needful length of sightand of arm, to come at the desired point. The greatest genius is themost indebted man. A poet is no rattlebrain, saying what comesuppermost, and, because he says everything, saying, at last, somethinggood; but a heart in unison with his time and country. There is nothingwhimsical and fantastic in his production, but sweet and sad earnest,freighted with the weightiest convictions, and pointed with the mostdetermined aim which any man or class knows of in his times.The Genius of our life is jealous of individuals, and will not haveany individual great, except through the general. There is no choiceto genius. A great man does not wake up on some fine morning, and say,"I am full of life, I will go to sea, and find an Antarctic continent:to-day I will square the circle: I will ransack botany, and find a newfood for man: I have a new architecture in my mind: I foresee a newmechanic power;" no, but he finds himself in the river of the thoughtsand events, forced onward by the ideas and necessities of hiscontemporaries. He stands where all the eyes of men look one way, andtheir hands all point in the direction in which he should go. Thechurch has reared him amidst rites and pomps, and he carries out theadvice which her music gave him, and builds a cathedral needed by herchants and processions. He finds a war raging: it educates him bytrumpet, in barracks, and he betters the instruction. He finds twocounties groping to bring coal, or flour, or fish, from the place ofproduction to the place of consumption, and he hits on a railroad.Every master has found his materials collected, and his power lay inhis sympathy with his people, and in his love of the materials hewrought in. What an economy of power! and what a compensation for theshortness of life! All is done to his hand. The world has brought himthus far on his way. The human race has gone out before him, sunk thehills, filled the hollows, and bridged the rivers. Men, nations, poets,artisans, women, all have worked for him, and he enters into theirlabors. Choose any other thing, out of the line of tendency, out ofthe national feeling and history, and he would have all to do forhimself: his powers would be expended in the first preparations. Greatgenial power, one would almost say, consists in not being original atall; in being altogether receptive; in letting the world do all, andsuffering the spirit of the hour to pass unobstructed through the mind.Shakspeare's youth fell in a time when the English people wereimportunate for dramatic entertainments. The court took offence easilyat political allusions, and attempted to suppress them. The Puritans,a growing and energetic party, and the religious among the Anglicanchurch, would suppress them. But the people wanted them. Inn-yards,houses without roofs, and extemporaneous enclosures at country fairs,were the ready theatres of strolling players. The people had tastedthis new joy; and, as we could not hope to suppress newspapers now,--no,not by the strongest party,--neither then could king, prelate, orpuritan, alone or united, suppress an organ, which was ballad, epic,newspaper, caucus, lecture, punch, and library, at the same time.Probably king, prelate and puritan, all found their own account in it.It had become, by all causes, a national interest,--by no meansconspicuous, so that some great scholar would have thought of treatingit in an English history,--but not a whit less considerable, becauseit was cheap, and of no account, like a baker's-shop. The best proofof its vitality is the crowd of writers which suddenly broke into thisfield; Kyd, Marlow, Greene, Jonson, Chapman, Dekker, Webster, Heywood,Middleton, Peele, Ford, Massinger, Beaumont, and Fletcher.The secure possession, by the stage, of the public mind, is of thefirst importance to the poet who works for it. He loses no time inidle experiments. Here is audience and expectation prepared. In thecase of Shakespeare there is much more. At the time when he leftStratford, and went up to London, a great body of stage-plays, ofall dates and writers, existed in manuscript, and were in turn producedon the boards. Here is the Tale of Troy, which the audience will bearhearing some part of every week; the Death of Julius Caesar, and otherstories out of Plutarch, which they never tire of; a shelf full ofEnglish history, from the chronicles of Brut and Arthur, down to theroyal Henries, which men hear eagerly; and a string of dolefultragedies, merry Italian tales, and Spanish voyages, which all theLondon 'prentices know. All the mass has been treated, with more orless skill, by every playwright, and the prompter has the soiled andtattered manuscripts. It is now no longer possible to say who wrotethem first. They have been the property of the Theatre so long, andso many rising geniuses have enlarged or altered them, inserting aspeech, or a whole scene, or adding a song, that no man can any longerclaim copyright on this work of numbers. Happily, no man wishes to.They are not yet desired in that way. We have few readers, manyspectators and hearers. They had best lie where they are.Shakspeare, in common with his comrades, esteemed the mass of oldplays, waste stock, in which any experiment could be freely tried. Hadthe _prestige_ which hedges about a modern tragedy existed, nothingcould have been done. The rude warm blood of the living Englandcirculated in the play, as in street-ballads, and gave body which hewanted to his airy and majestic fancy. The poet needs a ground inpopular tradition on which he may work, and which, again, may restrainhis art within the due temperance. It holds him to the people, suppliesa foundation for his edifice; and, in furnishing so much work done tohis hand, leaves him at leisure, and in full strength for the audacitiesof his imagination. In short, the poet owes to his legend what sculptureowed to the temple. Sculpture in Egypt, and in Greece, grew up insubordination to architecture. It was the ornament of the temple wall:at first, a rude relief carved on pediments, then the relief becamebolder, and a head or arm was projected from the wall, the groups beingstill arrayed with reference to the building, which serves also as aframe to hold the figures; and when, at last, the greatest freedom ofstyle and treatment was reached, the prevailing genius of architecturestill enforced a certain calmness and continence in the statue. Assoon as the statue was begun for itself, and with no reference to thetemple or palace, the art began to decline: freak, extravagance, andexhibition, took the place of the old temperance. This balance-wheel,which the sculptor found in architecture, the perilous irritabilityof poetic talent found in the accumulated dramatic materials to whichthe people were already wonted, and which had a certain excellencewhich no single genius, however extraordinary, could hope to create.In point of fact, it appears that Shakspeare did owe debts in alldirections, and was able to use whatever he found; and the amount ofindebtedness may be inferred from Malone's laborious computations inregard to the First, Second, and Third parts of Henry VI., in which,"out of 6043 lines, 1771 were written by some author precedingShakspeare; 2373 by him, on the foundation laid by his predecessors;and 1899 were entirely his own." And the preceding investigation hardlyleaves a single drama of his absolute invention. Malone's sentence isan important piece of external history. In Henry VIII., I think I seeplainly the cropping out of the original rock on which his own finerstratum was laid. The first play was written by a superior, thoughtfulman, with a vicious ear. I can mark his lines, and know well theircadence. See Wolsey's soliloquy, and the following scene with Cromwell,where,--instead of the metre of Shakspeare, whose secret is, that thethought constructs the tune, so that reading for the sense will bestbring out the rhythm,--here the lines are constructed on a given tune,and the verse has even a trace of pulpit eloquence. But the playcontains, through all its length, unmistakable traits of Shakspeare'shand, and some passages, as the account of the coronation, are likeautographs. What is odd, the compliment to Queen Elizabeth is in thebad rhythm.Shakspeare knew that tradition supplies a better fable that anyinvention can. If he lost any credit of design, he augmented hisresources; and, at that day our petulant demand for originality wasnot so much pressed. There was no literature for the million. Theuniversal reading, the cheap press, were unknown. A great poet, whoappears in illiterate times, absorbs into his sphere all the lightwhich is anywhere radiating. Every intellectual jewel, every flowerof sentiment, it is his fine office to bring to his people; and hecomes to value his memory equally with his invention. He is thereforelittle solicitous whence his thoughts have been derived; whether throughtranslation, whether through tradition, whether by travel in distantcountries, whether by inspiration; from whatever source, they areequally welcome to his uncritical audience. Nay, he borrows very nearhome. Other men say wise things as well as he; only they say a goodmany foolish things, and do not know when they have spoken wisely. Heknows the sparkle of the true stone, and puts it in high place, whereverhe finds it. Such is the happy position of Homer, perhaps; of Chaucer,of Saadi. They felt that all wit was their wit. And they are librariansand historiographers, as well as poets. Each romancer was heir anddispenser of all the hundred tales of the world,--  "Presenting Thebes' and Pelops' line  And the tale of Troy divine."The influence of Chaucer is conspicuous in all our early literature;and, more recently, not only Pope and Dryden have been beholden tohim, but, in the whole society of English writers, a largeunacknowledged debt is easily traced. One is charmed with the opulencewhich feeds so many pensioners. But Chaucer is a huge borrower. Chaucer,it seems, drew continually, through Lydgate and Caxton, from Guido diColonna, whose Latin romance of the Trojan war was in turn a compilationfrom Dares Phrygius, Ovid, and Statius. Then Petrarch, Boccaccio, andthe Provencal poets, are his benefactors: the Romaunt of the Rose isonly judicious translation from William of Lorris and John of Meun:Troilus and Creseide, from Lollius of Urbino: The Cock and the Fox,from the _Lais_ of Marie: The House of Fame, from the French orItalian: and poor Gower he uses as if he were only a brick-kiln orstone-quarry out of which to build his house. He steals by thisapology,--that what he takes has no worth where he finds it, and thegreatest where he leaves it. It has come to be practically a sort ofrule in literature, that a man, having once shown himself capable oforiginal writing, is entitled thenceforth to steal from the writingsof others at discretion. Thought is the property of him who canentertain it; and of him who can adequately place it. A certainawkwardness marks the use of borrowed thoughts; but, as soon as wehave learned what to do with them, they become our own.Thus, all originality is relative. Every thinker is retrospective. Thelearned member of the legislature, at Westminster, or at Washington,speaks and votes for thousands. Show us the constituency, and the nowinvisible channels by which the senator is made aware of their wishes,the crowd of practical and knowing men, who, by correspondence orconversation, are feeding him with evidence, anecdotes, and estimates,and it will bereave his fine attitude and resistance of something oftheir impressiveness. As Sir Robert Peel and Mr. Webster vote, so Lockeand Rousseau think for thousands; and so there were fountains allaround Homer, Menu, Saadi, or Milton, from which they drew; friends,lovers, books, traditions, proverbs,--all perished,--which, if seen,would go to reduce the wonder. Did the bard speak with authority? Didhe feel himself, overmatched by any companion? The appeal is to theconsciousness of the writer. Is there at last in his breast a Delhiwhereof to ask concerning any thought or thing, whether it be verilyso, yea or nay? and to have answer, and to rely on that? All the debtwhich such a man could contract to other wit, would never disturb hisconsciousness of originality: for the ministrations of books, and ofother minds, are a whiff of smoke to that most private reality withwhich he has conversed.It is easy to see that what is best written or done by genius, in theworld, was no man's work, but came by wide social labor, when a thousandwrought like one, sharing the same impulse. Our English Bible is awonderful specimen of the strength and music of the English language.But it was not made by one man, or at one time; but centuries andchurches brought it to perfection. There never was a time when therewas not some translation existing. The Liturgy, admired for its energyand pathos, is an anthology of the piety of ages and nations, atranslation of the prayers and forms of the Catholic church,--thesecollected, too, in long periods, from the prayers and meditations ofevery saint and sacred writer, all over the world. Grotius makes thelike remark in respect to the Lord's Prayer, that the single clausesof which it is composed were already in use, in the time of Christ,in the rabbinical forms. He picked out the grains of gold. The nervouslanguage of the Common Law, the impressive forms of our courts, andthe precision and substantial truth of the legal distinctions, are thecontribution of all the sharp-sighted, strong-minded men who have livedin the countries where these laws govern. The translation of Plutarchgets its excellence by being translation on translation. There neverwas a time when there was none. All the truly diomatic and nationalphrases are kept, and all others successively picked out and thrownaway. Something like the same process had gone on, long before, withthe originals of these books. The world takes liberties withworld-books. Vedas, Aesop's Fables, Pilpay, Arabian Nights, Cid, Iliad,Robin Hood, Scottish Minstrelsy, are not the work of single men. Inthe composition of such works, the time thinks, the market thinks, themason, the carpenter, the merchant, the farmer, the fop, all think forus. Every book supplies its time with one good word; every municipallaw, every trade, every folly of the day, and the generic catholicgenius who is not afraid or ashamed to owe his originality to theoriginality of all, stands with the next age as the recorder andembodiment of his own.We have to thank the researches of antiquaries, and the ShakspeareSociety, for ascertaining the steps of the English drama, from theMysteries celebrated in churches and by churchmen, and the finaldetachment from the church, and the completion of secular plays, fromFerrex and Porrex, and Gammer Gurton's Needle, down to the possessionof the stage by the very pieces which Shakspeare altered, remodelled,and finally made his own. Elated with success, and piqued by the growinginterest of the problem, they have left no book-stall unsearched, nochest in a garret unopened, no file of old yellow accounts to decomposein damp and worms, so keen was the hope to discover whether the boyShakspeare poached or not, whether he held horses at the theater door,whether he kept school, and why he left in his will only his second-bestbed to Ann Hathaway, his wife.There is somewhat touching in the madness with which the passing agemischooses the object on which all candles shine, and all eyes areturned; the care with which it registers every trifle touching QueenElizabeth, and King James, and the Essexes, Leicesters, Burleighs, andBuckinghams; and let pass without a single valuable note the founderof another dynasty, which alone will cause the Tudor dynasty to beremembered,--the man who carries the Saxon race in him by theinspiration which feeds him, and on whose thoughts the foremost peopleof the world are now for some ages to be nourished, and minds to receivethis and not another bias. A popular player,--nobody suspected he wasthe poet of the human race; and the secret was kept as faithfully frompoets and intellectual men, as from courtiers and frivolous people.Bacon, who took the inventory of the human understanding for his times,never mentioned his name. Ben Jonson, though we have strained his fewwords of regard and panegyric, had no suspicion of the elastic famewhose first vibrations he was attempting. He no doubt thought thepraise he has conceded to him generous, and esteemed himself, out ofall question, the better poet of the two.If it need wit to know wit, according to the proverb, Shakspeare'stime should be capable of recognizing it. Sir Henry Wotton was bornfour years after Shakspeare, and died twenty-three years after him;and I find among his correspondents and acquaintances, the followingpersons: Theodore Beza, Isaac Casaubon, Sir Philip Sidney, Earl ofEssex, Lord Bacon, Sir Walter Raleigh, John Milton, Sir Henry Vane,Isaac Walton, Dr. Donne, Abraham Cowley, Bellarmine, Charles Cotton,John Pym, John Hales, Kepler, Vieta, Albericus Gentilis, Paul Sarpi,Ariminius; with all of whom exist some token of his having communicated,without enumerating many others, whom doubtless he saw,--Shakspeare,Spenser, Jonson, Beaumont, Massinger, two Herberts, Marlow, Chapman,and the rest. Since the constellation of great men who appeared inGreece in the time of Pericles, there was never any such society;--yettheir genius failed them to find out the best head in the universe.Our poet's mask was impenetrable. You cannot see the mountain near.It took a century to make it suspected; and not until two centurieshad passed, after his death, did any criticism which we think adequatebegin to appear. It was not possible to write the history of Shakspearetill now; for he is the father of German literature: it was on theintroduction of Shakspeare into German by Lessing, and the translationof his works by Wieland and Schlegel, that the rapid burst of Germanliterature was most intimately connected. It was not until thenineteenth century, whose speculative genius is a sort of living Hamlet,that the tragedy of Hamlet should find such wondering readers. Now,literature, philosophy, and thought are Shakspearized. His mind is thehorizon beyond which, at present, we do not see. Our ears are educatedto music by his rhythm. Coleridge and Goethe are the only critics whohave expressed our convictions with any adequate fidelity: but thereis in all cultivated minds a silent appreciation of his superlativepower and beauty, which, like Christianity, qualifies the period.The Shakspeare Society have inquired in all directions, advertised themissing facts, offered money for any information that will lead toproof; and with what results? Beside some important illustration ofthe history of the English stage, to which I have adverted, they havegleaned a few facts touching the property, and dealings in regard toproperty, of the poet. It appears that, from year to year, he owneda larger share in the Blackfriars' Theater: its wardrobe and otherappurtenances were his: that he bought an estate in his native village,with his earnings, as writer and shareholder; that he lived in thebest house in Stratford; was intrusted by his neighbors with theircommissions in London, as of borrowing money, and the like; that hewas a veritable farmer. About the time when he was writing Macbeth,he sues Philip Rogers, in the borough-court of Stratford, forthirty-five shillings ten pence, for corn delivered to him at differenttimes; and, in all respects, appears as a good husband, with noreputation for eccentricity or excess. He was a good-natured sort ofman, an actor and shareholder in the theater, not in any strikingmanner distinguished from other actors and managers. I admit theimportance of this information. It was well worth the pains that havebeen taken to procure it.But whatever scraps of information concerning his condition theseresearches may have rescued, they can shed no light upon that infiniteinvention which is the concealed magnet of his attraction for us. Weare very clumsy writers of history. We tell the chronicle of parentage,birth, birthplace, schooling, schoolmates, earning of money, marriage,publication of books, celebrity, death; and when we have come to anend of this gossip, no ray of relation appears between it and thegoddess-born; and it seems as if, had we dipped at random into the"Modern Plutarch," and read any other life there, it would have fittedthe poems as well, It is the essence of poetry to spring, like therainbow daughter of Wonder, from the invisible, to abolish the past,and refuse all history. Malone, Warburton, Dyce, and Collier, havewasted their oil. The famed theaters, Covent Garden, Drury Lane, thePark, and Tremont, have vainly assisted. Betterton, Garrick, Kemble,Kean, and Macready, dedicate their lives to this genius; him theycrown, elucidate, obey, and express. The genius knows them not. Therecitation begins; one golden word leaps out immortal from all thispainted pedantry, and sweetly torments us with invitations to its owninaccessible homes. I remember, I went once to see the Hamlet of afamed performer, the pride of the English stage; and all I then heard,and all I now remember, of the tragedian, was that in which thetragedian had no part; simply, Hamlet's question to the ghost,--            "What may this mean,  That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel  Revisit'st thus the glimpses of the moon?"That imagination which dilates the closet he writes into the world'sdimension, crowds it with agents in rank and order, as quickly reducesthe big reality to be the glimpses of the moon. These tricks of hismagic spoil for us the illusions of the green-room. Can any biographyshed light on the localities into which the Midsummer Night's Dreamadmits me? Did Shakspeare confide to any notary or parish recorder,sacristan, or surrogate, in Stratford, the genesis of that delicatecreation? The forest of Arden, the nimble air of Scone Castle, themoonlight of Portia's villa, "the antres vast and desarts idle," ofOthello's captivity,--where is the third cousin, or grand-nephew, thechancellor's file of accounts, or private letter, that has kept oneword of those transcendent secrets. In fine, in this drama, as in allgreat works of art,--in the Cyclopaean architecture of Egypt and India;in the Phidian sculpture; the Gothic minsters; the Italian painting;the Ballads of Spain and Scotland,--the Genius draws up the ladderafter him, when the creative age goes up to heaven, and gives way toa new, who see the works, and ask in vain for a history.Shakspeare is the only biographer of Shakspeare; and even he can tellnothing, except to the Shakspeare in us; that is, to our mostapprehensive and sympathetic hour. He cannot step from off his tripod,and give us anecdotes of his inspirations. Read the antique documentsextricated, analyzed, and compared, by the assiduous Dyce and Collier;and now read one of those skyey sentences,--aerolites,--which seem tohave fallen out of heaven, and which, not your experience, but the manwithin the breast, has accepted as words of fate; and tell me if theymatch; if the former account in any manner for the latter; or, whichgives the most historical insight into the man.Hence, though our external history is so meager, yet, with Shakspearefor biographer, instead of Aubrey and Rowe, we have really theinformation which is material, that which describes character andfortune; that which, if we were about to meet the man and deal withhim, would most import us to know. We have his recorded convictionson those questions which knock for answer at every heart,--on life anddeath, on love, on wealth and poverty, on the prizes of life, and theways whereby we may come at them; on the characters of men, and theinfluences, occult and open, which affect their fortunes: and on thosemysterious and demoniacal powers which defy our science, and which yetinterweave their malice and their gift in our brightest hours. Whoever read the volume of Sonnets, without finding that the poet hadthere revealed, under masks that are no masks to the intelligent, thelore of friendship and of love; the confusion of sentiments in themost susceptible, and, at the same time, the most intellectual of men?What trait of his private mind has he hidden in his dramas? One candiscern, in his ample pictures of the gentleman and the king, whatforms and humanities pleased him; his delight in troops of friends,in large hospitality, in cheerful giving. Let Timon, let Warwick, letAntonio the merchant, answer for his great heart. So far from Shakspearebeing the least known, he is the one person, in all modern history,known to us. What point of morals, of manners, of economy, ofphilosophy, of religion, of taste, of the conduct of life, has he notsettled? What mystery has he not signified his knowledge of? Whatoffice or function, or district of man's work, has he not remembered?What king has he not taught state, as Talma taught Napoleon? Whatmaiden has not found him finer than her delicacy? What lover has henot outloved? What sage has he not outseen? What gentleman has he notinstructed in the rudeness of his behavior?Some able and appreciating critics think no criticism on Shakspearevaluable, that does not rest purely on the dramatic merit; that he isfalsely judged as poet and philosopher. I think as highly as thesecritics of his dramatic merit, but still think it secondary. He wasa full man, who liked to talk; a brain exhaling thoughts and images,which, seeking vent, found the drama next at hand. Had he been less,we should have had to consider how well he filled his place, how gooda dramatist he was,--and he is the best in the world. But it turnsout; that what he has to say is of that weight, as to withdraw someattention from the vehicle; and he is like some saint whose historyis to be rendered into all languages, into verse and prose, into songsand pictures, and cut up into proverbs; so that the occasions whichgave the saint's meaning the form of a conversation, or of a prayer,or of a code of laws, is immaterial compared with the universality ofits application. So it fares with the wise Shakspeare and his book oflife. He wrote the airs for all our modern music: he wrote the textof modern life; the text of manners: he drew the man of England andEurope; the father of the man in America: he drew the man and describedthe day, and what is done in it: he read the hearts of men and women,their probity, and their second thought, and wiles; the wiles ofinnocence, and the transitions by which virtues and vices slide intotheir contraries: he could divide the mother's part from the father'spart in the face of the child, or draw the fine demarcations of freedomand fate: he knew the laws of repression which make the police ofnature: and all the sweets and all the terrors of human lot lay in hismind as truly but as softly as the landscape lies on the eye. And theimportance of this wisdom of life sinks the form, as of Drama or Epic,out of notice. 'Tis like making a question concerning the paper onwhich a king's message is written.Shakspeare is as much out of the category of eminent authors, as heis out of the crowd. He is inconceivably wise; the others, conceivably.A good reader can, in a sort, nestle into Plato's brain, and thinkfrom thence; but not into Shakspeare's. We are still out of doors. Forexecutive faculty, for creation, Shakspeare is unique. No man canimagine it better. He was the farthest reach of subtlety compatiblewith an individual self,--the subtilest of authors, and only justwithin the possibility of authorship. With this wisdom of life, is theequal endowment of imaginative and of lyric power. He clothed thecreatures of his legend with form and sentiments, as if they werepeople who had lived under his roof; and few real men have left suchdistinct characters as these fictions. And they spoke in language assweet as it was fit. Yet his talents never seduced him into anostentation, nor did he harp on one string. An omnipresent humanityco-ordinates all his faculties. Give a man of talents a story to tell,and his partiality will presently appear. He has certain observations,opinions, topics, which have some accidental prominence, and which hedisposes all to exhibit. He crams this part, and starves that otherpart, consulting not the fitness of the thing, but his fitness andstrength. But Shakspeare has no peculiarity, no importunate topic; butall is duly given; no veins, no curiosities: no cow-painter, nobird-fancier, no mannerist is he: he has no discoverable egotism: thegreat he tells greatly; the small subordinately. He is wise withoutemphasis or assertion; he is strong, as nature is strong, who liftsthe land into mountain slopes without effort, and by the same rule asshe floats a bubble in the air, and likes as well to do the one as theother. This makes that equality of power in farce, tragedy, narrative,and love-songs; a merit so incessant, that each reader is incredulousof the perception of other readers.This power of expression, or of transferring the inmost truth of thingsinto music and verse, makes him the type of the poet, and has addeda new problem to metaphysics. This is that which throws him into naturalhistory, as a main production of the globe, and as announcing new erasand ameliorations. Things were mirrored in his poetry without loss orblur: he could paint the fine with precision, the great with compass;the tragic and comic indifferently, and without any distortion orfavor. He carried his powerful execution into minute details, to ahair point; finishes an eyelash or a dimple as firmly as he draws amountain; and yet these like nature's, will bear the scrutiny of thesolar microscope.In short, he is the chief example to prove that more or less ofproduction, more or fewer pictures, is a thing indifferent. He had thepower to make one picture. Daguerre learned how to let one flower etchits image on his plate of iodine; and then proceeds at leisure to etcha million. There are always objects; but there was never representation.Here is perfect representation, at last; and now let the world offigures sit for their portraits. No recipe can be given for the makingof a Shakspeare; but the possibility of the translation of things intosong is demonstrated.His lyric power lies in the genius of the piece. The sonnets, thoughtheir excellence is lost in the splendor of the dramas, are asinimitable as they: and it is not a merit of lines, but a total meritof the piece; like the tone of voice of some incomparable person, sois this a speech of poetic beings, and any clause as unproducible nowas a whole poem.Though the speeches in the plays, and single lines, have a beauty whichtempts the ear to pause on them for their euphuism, yet the sentenceis so loaded with meaning, and so linked with its foregoers andfollowers, that the logician is satisfied. His means are as admirableas his ends; every subordinate invention, by which he helps himselfto connect some irreconcilable opposites, is a poem too. He is notreduced to dismount and walk, because his horses are running off withhim in some distant direction: he always rides.The finest poetry was first experience: but the thought has suffereda transformation since it was an experience. Cultivated men oftenattain a good degree of skill in writing verses; but it is easy toread, through their poems, their personal history; any one acquaintedwith parties can name every figure: this is Andrew, and that is Rachel.The sense thus remains prosaic. It is a caterpillar with wings, andnot yet a butterfly. In the poet's mind, the fact has gone quite overinto the new element of thought, and has lost all that is exuvial.This generosity abides with Shakspeare. We say, from the truth andcloseness of his pictures, that he knows the lesson by heart. Yet thereis not a trace of egotism.One more royal trait properly belongs to the poet. I mean hischeerfulness, without which no man can be a poet,--for beauty is hisaim. He loves virtue, not for its obligation, but for its grace: hedelights in the world, in man, in woman, for the lovely light thatsparkles from them. Beauty, the spirit of joy and hilarity, he shedsover the universe. Epicurus relates, that poetry hath such charms thata lover might forsake his mistress to partake of them. And the truebards have been noted for their firm and cheerful temper. Homer liesin sunshine; Chaucer is glad and erect; and Saadi says, "It was rumoredabroad that I was penitent; but what had I to do with repentance?" Notless sovereign and cheerful,--much more sovereign and cheerful is thetone of Shakspeare. His name suggests joy and emancipation to the heartof men. If he should appear in any company of human souls, who wouldnot march in his troop? He touches nothing that does not borrow healthand longevity from his festive style.And now, how stands the account of man with this bard and benefactor,when in solitude, shutting our ears to the reverberations of his fame,we seek to strike the balance? Solitude has austere lessons; it canteach us to spare both heroes and poets; and it weighs Shakspeare also,and finds him to share the halfness and imperfections of humanity.Shakspeare, Homer, Dante, Chaucer, saw the splendor of meaning thatplays over the visible world; knew that a tree had another use thanfor apples, and corn another than for meal, and the ball of the earth,than for tillage and roads: that these things bore a second and finerharvest to the mind, being emblems of its thoughts, and conveying inall their natural history a certain mute commentary on human life.Shakspeare employed them as colors to compose his picture. He restedin their beauty; and never took the step which seemed inevitable tosuch genius, namely, to explore the virtue which resides in thesesymbols, and imparts this power,--what is that which they themselvessay? He converted the elements, which waited on his command, intoentertainments. He was master of the revels to mankind. Is it not asif one should have, through majestic powers of science, the cometsgiven into his hand, or the planets and their moons, and should drawthem from their orbits to glare with the municipal fireworks on aholiday night, and advertise in all towns, "very superior pyrotechnythis evening!" Are the agents of nature, and the power to understandthem, worth no more than a street serenade, or the breath of a cigar?One remembers again the trumpet-text in the Koran--"The heavens andthe earth, and all that is between them, think ye we have created themin jest?" As long as the question is of talent and mental power, theworld of men has not his equal to show. But when the question is tolife, and its materials, and its auxiliaries, how does he profit me?What does it signify? It is but a Twelfth Night, or Midsummer-Night'sDream, or a Winter Evening's Tale: what signifies another picture moreor less? The Egyptian verdict of the Shakspeare Societies comes tomind, that he was a jovial actor and manager. I cannot marry this factto his verse. Other admirable men have led lives in some sort of keepingwith their thought; but this man, in wide contrast. Had he been less,had he reached only the common measure of great authors, of Bacon,Milton, Tasso, Cervantes, we might leave the fact in the twilight ofhuman fate: but, that this man of men, he who gave to the science ofmind a new and larger subject than had ever existed, and planted thestandard of humanity some furlongs forward into Chaos,--that he shouldnot be wise for himself,--it must even go into the world's history,that the best poet led an obscure and profane life, using his geniusfor the public amusement.Well, other men, priest and prophet, Israelite, German, and Swede,beheld the same objects: they also saw through them that which wascontained. And to what purpose? The beauty straightway vanishes; theyread commandments, all-excluding mountainous duty; an obligation, asadness, as of piled mountains, fell on them, and life became ghastly,joyless, a pilgrim's progress, a probation, beleaguered round withdoleful histories of Adam's fall and curse, behind us; with doomsdaysand purgatorial and penal fires before us; and the heart of the seerand the heart of the listener sank in them.  It must be conceded thatthese are half-views of half-men. The world still wants itspoet-priest, a reconciler, who shall not trifle with Shakspeare theplayer, nor shall grope in graves with Swedenborg the mourner; but whoshall see, speak, and act, with equal inspiration. For knowledge willbrighten the sunshine; right is more beautiful than private affection;and love is compatible with universal wisdom.VI. NAPOLEON; OR, THE MAN OF THE WORLD.Among the eminent persons of the nineteenth century, Bonaparte is farthe best known, and the most powerful; and owes his predominance tothe fidelity with which he expresses the tone of thought and belief,the aims of the masses of active and cultivated men. It is Swedenborg'stheory, that every organ is made up of homogeneous particles; or, asit is sometimes expressed, every whole is made of similars; that is,the lungs are composed of infinitely small lungs; the liver, ofinfinitely small livers; the kidney, of little kidneys, etc. Followingthis analogy, if any man is found to carry with him the power andaffections of vast numbers, if Napoleon is France, if Napoleon isEurope, it is because the people whom he sways are little Napoleons.In our society, there is a standing antagonism between the conservativeand the democratic classes; between those who have made their fortunes,and the young and the poor who have fortunes to make; between theinterests of dead labor,--that is, the labor of hands long ago stillin the grave, which labor is now entombed in money stocks, or in landand buildings owned by idle capitalists,--and the interests of livinglabor, which seeks to possess itself of land, and buildings, and moneystocks. The first class is timid, selfish, illiberal, hating innovation,and continually losing numbers by death. The second class is selfishalso, encroaching, bold, self-relying, always outnumbering the other,and recruiting its numbers every hour by births. It desires to keepopen every avenue to the competition of all, and to multiplyavenues;--the class of business men in America, in England, in France,and throughout Europe; the class of industry and skill. Napoleon isits representative. The instinct of active, brave, able men, throughoutthe middle class everywhere, has pointed out Napoleon as the incarnateDemocrat. He had their virtues, and their vices; above all, he hadtheir spirit or aim. That tendency is material, pointing at a sensualsuccess, and employing the richest and most various means to that end;conversant with mechanical powers, highly intellectual, widely andaccurately learned and skilful, but subordinating all intellectual andspiritual forces into means to a material success. To be the rich manis the end. "God has granted" says the Koran, "to every people a prophetin its own tongue." Paris, and London, and New York, the spirit ofcommerce, of money, and material power, were also to have their prophet;and Bonaparte was qualified and sent.Every one of the million readers of anecdotes, or memoirs, or livesof Napoleon, delights in the page, because he studies in it his ownhistory. Napoleon is thoroughly modern, and, at the highest point ofhis fortunes, has the very spirit of the newspapers. He is no saint,--touse his own word, "no capuchin," and he is no hero, in the high sense.The man in the street finds in him the qualities and powers of othermen in the street. He finds him, like himself, by birth a citizen,who, by very intelligible merits, arrived at such a commanding position,that he could indulge all those tastes which the common man possesses,but is obliged to conceal and deny; good society, good books, fasttraveling, dress, dinners, servants without number, personal weight,the execution of his ideas, the standing in the attitude of a benefactorto all persons about him, the refined enjoyments of pictures, statues,music, palaces, and conventional honors,--precisely what is agreeableto the heart of every man in the nineteenth century,--this powerfulman possessed.It is true that a man of Napoleon's truth of adaptation to the mindof the masses around him becomes not merely representative, but actuallya monopolizer and usurper of other minds. Thus Mirabeau plagiarizedevery good thought, every good word, that was spoken in France. Dumontrelates that he sat in the gallery of the Convention, and heard Mirabeaumake a speech. It struck Dumont that he could fit it with a peroration,which he wrote in pencil immediately, and showed to Lord Elgin, whosat by him. Lord Elgin approved it, and Dumont, in the evening, showedit to Mirabeau. Mirabeau read it, pronounced it admirable, and declaredhe would incorporate it into his harangue, to-morrow, to the Assembly."It is impossible," said Dumont, "as, unfortunately, I have shown itto Lord Elgin." "If you have shown it to Lord Elgin, and to fiftypersons beside, I shall still speak it to-morrow:" and he did speakit, with much effect, at the next day's session. For Mirabeau, withhis overpowering personality, felt that these things, which his presenceinspired, were as much his own, as if he had said them, and that hisadoption of them gave them their weight. Much more absolute andcentralizing was the successor to Mirabeau's popularity, and to muchmore than his predominance in France. Indeed, a man of Napoleon's stampalmost ceases to have a private speech and opinion. He is so largelyreceptive, and is so placed, that he comes to be a bureau for all theintelligence, wit, and power, of the age and country. He gains thebattle; he makes the code; he makes the system of weights and measures;he levels the Alps; he builds the road. All distinguished engineers,savants, statists, report to him; so likewise do all good heads inevery kind; he adopts the best measures, sets his stamp on them, andnot these alone, but on every happy and memorable expression. Everysentence spoken by Napoleon, and every line of his writing, deservesreading, as it is the sense of France.Bonaparte was the idol of common men, because he had in transcendentdegree the qualities and powers of common men. There is a certainsatisfaction in coming down to the lowest ground of politics, for weget rid of cant and hypocrisy. Bonaparte wrought, in common with thatgreat class he represented, for power and wealth,--but Bonaparte,specially, without any scruple as to the means. All the sentimentswhich embarrass men's pursuit of these objects, he set aside. Thesentiments were for women and children. Fontanes, in 1804, expressedNapoleon's own sense, when, in behalf of the Senate, he addressedhim,--"Sire, the desire of perfection is the worst disease that everafflicted the human mind." The advocates of liberty, and of progress,are "ideologists;"--a word of contempt often in his mouth;--"Neckeris an ideologist:" "Lafayette is an ideologist."An Italian proverb, too well known, declares that, "if you wouldsucceed, you must not be too good." It is an advantage, within certainlimits, to have renounced the dominion of the sentiments of piety,gratitude, and generosity; since, what was an impassable bar to us,and still is to others, becomes a convenient weapon for our purposes;just as the river which was a formidable barrier, winter transformsinto the smoothest of roads.Napoleon renounced, once for all, sentiments and affections, and wouldhelp himself with his hands and his head. With him is no miracle, andno magic. He is a worker in brass, in iron, in wood, in earth, inroads, in buildings, in money, and in troops, and a very consistentand wise master-workman. He is never weak and literary, but acts withthe solidity and the precision of natural agents. He has not lost hisnative sense and sympathy with things. Men give way before such a manas before natural events. To be sure, there are men enough who areimmersed in things, as farmers, smiths, sailors, and mechanicsgenerally; and we know how real and solid such men appear in thepresence of scholars and grammarians; but these men ordinarily lackthe power of arrangement, and are like hands without a head. ButBonaparte superadded to this mineral and animal force, insight andgeneralization, so that men saw in him combined the natural and theintellectual power, as if the sea and land had taken flesh and begunto cipher. Therefore the land and sea seem to presuppose him. He cameunto his own, and they received him. This ciphering operative knowswhat he is working with, and what is the product. He knew the propertiesof gold and iron, of wheels and ships, of troops and diplomatists, andrequired that each should do after its kind.The art of war was the game in which he exerted his arithmetic. Itconsisted, according to him, in having always more forces than theenemy, on the point where the enemy is attacked, or where he attacks:and his whole talent is strained by endless manoeuvre and evolution,to march always on the enemy at an angle, and destroy his forces indetail. It is obvious that a very small force, skilfully and rapidlymanoeuvring, so as always to bring two men against one at the pointof engagement, will be an overmatch for a much larger body of men.The times, his constitution, and his early circumstances, combined todevelop this pattern democrat. He had the virtues of his class, andthe conditions for their activity. That common sense, which no soonerrespects any end, than it finds the means to effect it; the delightin the use of means; in the choice, simplification, and combining ofmeans; the directness and thoroughness of his work; the prudence withwhich all was seen, and the energy with which all was done, make himthe natural organ and head of what I may almost call, from its extent,the modern party.Nature must have far the greatest share in every success, and so inhis. Such a man was wanted, and such a man was born; a man of stoneand iron, capable of sitting on horseback sixteen or seventeen hours,of going many days together without rest or food, except by snatches,and with the speed and spring of a tiger in action; a man notembarrassed by any scruples; compact, instant, selfish, prudent, andof a perception which did not suffer itself to be balked or misled byany pretences of others, or any superstition, or any heat or haste ofhis own. "My hand of iron," he said, "was not at the extremity of myarm; it was immediately connected with my head." He respected the powerof nature and fortune, and ascribed to it his superiority, instead ofvaluing himself, like inferior men, on his opinionativeness and wagingwar with nature. His favorite rhetoric lay in allusion to his star:and he pleased himself, as well as the people, when he styled himselfthe "Child of Destiny." "They charge me," he said, "with the commissionof great crimes: men of my stamp do not commit crimes. Nothing hasbeen more simple than my elevation: 'tis in vain to ascribe it tointrigue or crime: it was owing to the peculiarity of the times, andto my reputation of having fought well against the enemies of mycountry. I have always marched with the opinion of great masses, andwith events. Of what use, then, would crimes be to me?" Again he said,speaking of his son, "My son cannot replace me; I could not replacemyself. I am the creature of circumstances." He had a directness ofaction never before combined with so much comprehension. He is arealist, terrific to all talkers, and confused truth-obscuring persons.He sees where the matter hinges, throws himself on the precise pointof resistance, and slights all other considerations. He is strong inthe right manner, namely, by insight. He never blundered into victory,but won his battles in his head, before he won them on the field. Hisprincipal means are in himself. He asks counsel of no other. In 1796,he writes to the Directory: "I have conducted the campaign withoutconsulting any one. I should have done no good, if I had been underthe necessity of conforming to the notions of another person. I havegained some advantages over superior forces, and when totally destituteof everything, because, in the persuasion that your confidence wasreposed in me, my actions were as prompt as my thoughts."History is full, down to this day, of the imbecility of kings andgovernors. They are a class of persons much to be pitied, for theyknow not what they should do. The weavers strike for bread; and theking and his ministers, not knowing what to do, meet them with bayonets.But Napoleon understood his business. Here was a man who, in eachmoment and emergency, knew what to do next. It is an immense comfortand refreshment to the spirits, not only of kings, but of citizens.Few men have any next; they live from hand to mouth, without plan, andare ever at the end of their line, and, after each action, wait foran impulse from abroad. Napoleon had been the first man of the worldif his ends had been purely public. As he is, he inspires confidenceand vigor by the extraordinary unity of his action. He is firm, sure,self-denying, self-postponing, sacrificing everything to hisaim,--money, troops, generals, and his own safety also, to his aim;not misled, like common adventurers, by the splendor of his own means."Incidents ought not to govern policy," he said, "but policy,incidents." "To be hurried away by every event, is to have no politicalsystem at all. His victories were only so many doors, and he never fora moment lost sight of his way onward, in the dazzle and uproar of thepresent circumstance. He knew what to do, and he flew to his mark. Hewould shorten a straight line to come at his object. Horrible anecdotesmay, no doubt, be collected from his history, of the price at whichhe bought his successes; but he must not therefore be set down ascruel; but only as one who knew no impediment to his will; notbloodthirsty, not cruel,--but woe to what thing or person stood in hisway! Not bloodthirsty, but not sparing of blood,--and pitiless. He sawonly the object: the obstacle must give way. "Sire, General Clarkecannot combine with General Junot, for the dreadful fire of the Austrianbattery."--"Let him carry the battery."--"Sire, every regiment thatapproaches the heavy artillery is sacrified: Sire, what orders?"--"Forward, forward!" Seruzier, a colonel of artillery, gives, in his"Military Memoirs," the following sketch of a scene after the battleof Austerlitz.--"At the moment in which the Russian army was makingits retreat, painfully, but in good order, on the ice of the lake, theEmperor Napoleon came riding at full speed toward the artillery. 'Youare losing time,' he cried; 'fire upon those masses; they must beengulfed; fire upon the ice!' The order remained unexecuted for tenminutes. In vain several officers and myself were placed on the slopeof a hill to produce the effect; their balls and mine rolled upon theice, without breaking it up. Seeing that, I tried a simple method ofelevating light howitzers. The almost perpendicular fall of the heavyprojectiles produced the desired effect. My method was immediatelyfollowed by the adjoining batteries, and in less than no time we buried'some' [Footnote: As I quote at second-hand, and cannot procureSeruzier, I dare not adopt the high figure I find.] thousands ofRussians and Austrians under the waters of the lake."In the plenitude of his resources, every obstacle seemed to vanish."There shall be no Alps," he said; and he built his perfect roads,climbing by graded galleries their steepest precipices, until Italywas as open to Paris as any town in France. He laid his bones to, andwrought for his crown. Having decided what was to be done, he did thatwith might and main. He put out all his strength. He risked everything,and spared nothing, neither ammunition, nor money, nor troops, norgenerals, nor himself.We like to see everything do its office after its kind, whether it bea milch-cow or a rattlesnake; and, if fighting be the best mode ofadjusting national differences (as large majorities of men seem toagree), certainly Bonaparte was right in making it thorough. "The grandprinciple of war," he said, "was, that an army ought always to beready, by day and by night, and at all hours, to make all the resistanceit is capable of making." He never economized his ammunition, but, ona hostile position, rained a torrent of iron,--shells, balls,grape-shot,--to annihilate all defense. On any point of resistance,he concentrated squadron on squadron in overwhelming numbers, untilit was swept out of existence. To a regiment of horse-chasseurs atLobenstein, two days before the battle of Jena, Napoleon said, "Mylads, you must not fear death; when soldiers brave death, they drivehim into the enemy's ranks." In the fury of assault, he no more sparedhimself. He went to the edge of his possibility. It is plain that inItaly he did what he could, and all that he could. He came, severaltimes, within an inch of ruin; and his own person was all but lost.He was flung into the marsh at Arcola. The Austrians were between himand his troops, in the melee, and he was brought off with desperateefforts. At Lonato, and at other places, he was on the point of beingtaken prisoner. He fought sixty battles. He had never enough. Eachvictory was a new weapon. "My power would fall, were I not to supportit by new achievements. Conquest has made me what I am, and conquestmust maintain me." He felt, with every wise man, that as much life isneeded for conservation as for creation. We are always in peril, alwaysin a bad plight, just on the edge of destruction, and only to be savedby invention and courage.This vigor was guarded and tempered by the coldest prudence andpunctuality. A thunderbolt in the attack, he was found invulnerablein his intrenchments. His very attack was never the inspiration ofcourage, but the result of calculation. His idea of the best defenseconsists in being still the attacking party. "My ambition," he says,"was great, but was of a cold nature." In one of his conversationswith Las Casas, he remarked, "As to moral courage, I have rarely metwith the two-o'clock-in-the-morning kind; I mean unprepared courage,that which, is necessary on an unexpected occasion; and which, in spiteof the most unforeseen events, leaves full freedom of judgment anddecision;" and he did not hesitate to declare that he was himselfeminently endowed with this "two-o'clock-in-the-morning courage, andthat he had met with few persons equal to himself in this respect."Everything depended on the nicety of his combinations, and the starswere not more punctual than his arithmetic. His personal attentiondescended to the smallest particulars. "At Montebello, I orderedKellermann to attack with eight hundred horse, and with these heseparated the six thousand Hungarian grenadiers, before the very eyesof the Austrian cavalry. This cavalry was half a league off, andrequired a quarter of an hour to arrive on the field of action; andI have observed, that it is always these quarters of an hour thatdecide the fate of a battle." "Before he fought a battle, Bonapartethought little about what he should do in case of success, but a greatdeal about what he should do in case of a reverse of fortune. "Thesame prudence and good sense mark all his behavior. His instructionsto his secretary at the Tuilleries are worth remembering. "During thenight, enter my chamber as seldom as possible. Do not wake me when youhave any good news to communicate; with that there is no hurry. Butwhen you bring bad news, rouse me instantly, for then there is not amoment to be lost." It was a whimsical economy of the same kind whichdictated his practice, when general in Italy, in regard to hisburdensome correspondence. He directed Bourienne to leave all lettersunopened for three weeks, and then observed with satisfaction how largea part of the correspondence had thus disposed of itself, and no longerrequired an answer. His achievement of business was immense, andenlarges the known powers of man. There have been many working kings,from Ulysses to William of Orange, but none who accomplished a titheof this man's performance.To these gifts of nature, Napoleon added the advantage of having beenborn to a private and humble fortune. In his latter days, he had theweakness of wishing to add to his crowns and badges the prescriptionof aristocracy; but he knew his debt to his austere education, andmade no secret of his contempt for the born kings, and for "thehereditary asses," as he coarsely styled the Bourbons. He said that,"in their exile, they had learned nothing, and forgot nothing."Bonaparte had passed through all the degrees of military service, butalso was citizen before he was emperor, and so had the key tocitizenship. His remarks and estimates discover the information andjustness of measurement of the middle class. Those who had to dealwith him found that he was not to be imposed upon, but could cipheras well as another man. This appears in all parts of his Memoirs,dictated at St. Helena. When the expenses of the empress, of hishousehold, of his palaces, had accumulated great debts, Napoleonexamined the bills of the creditors himself, detected overcharges anderrors, and reduced the claims by considerable sums.His grand weapon, namely, the millions whom he directed, he owed tothe representative character which clothed him. He interests us as hestands for France and for Europe; and he exists as captain and king,only as far as the Revolution, or the interest of the industriousmasses found an organ and a leader in him. In the social interests,he knew the meaning and value of labor, and threw himself naturallyon that side. I like an incident mentioned by one of his biographersat St. Helena. "When walking with Mrs. Balcombe, some servants, carryingheavy boxes, passed by on the road, and Mrs. Balcombe desired them,in rather an angry tone, to keep back. Napoleon interfered, saying,'Respect the burden, Madam.'" In the time of the empire, he directedattention to the improvement and embellishment of the market of thecapital. "The market-place," he said, "is the Louvre of the commonpeople." The principal works that have survived him are his magnificentroads. He filled the troops with his spirit, and a sort of freedom andcompanionship grew up between him and them, which the forms of hiscourt never permitted between the officers and himself. They performed,under his eye, that which no others could do. The best document of hisrelation to his troops is the order of the day on the morning of thebattle of Austerlitz, in which Napoleon promises the troops that hewill keep his person out of reach of fire. This declaration, which isthe reverse of that ordinarily made by generals and sovereigns on theeve of a battle, sufficiently explains the devotion of the army totheir leader.But though there is in particulars this identity between Napoleon andthe mass of the people, his real strength lay in their conviction thathe was their representative in his genius and aims, not only when hecourted, but when he controlled, and even when he decimated them byhis conscriptions. He knew, as well as any Jacobin in France, how tophilosophize on liberty and equality; and, when allusion was made tothe precious blood of centuries, which was spilled by the killing ofthe Duc d'Enghien, he suggested, "Neither is my blood ditch-water" Thepeople felt that no longer the throne was occupied, and the land suckedof its nourishment, by a small class of legitimates, secluded from allcommunity with the children of the soil, and holding the ideas andsuperstitions of a long-forgotten state of society. Instead of thatvampire, a man of themselves held, in the Tuilleries, knowledge andideas like their own, opening, of course, to them and their children,all places of power and trust. The day of sleepy, selfish policy, evernarrowing the means and opportunities of young men, was ended, and aday of expansion and demand was come. A market for all the powers andproductions of man was opened: brilliant prizes glittered in the eyesof youth and talent. The old, iron-bound, feudal France was changedinto a young Ohio or New York; and those who smarted under the immediaterigors of the new monarch, pardoned them as the necessary severitiesof the military system which had driven out the oppressor. And evenwhen the majority of the people had begun to ask, whether they hadreally gained anything under the exhausting levies of men and moneyof the new master,--the whole talent of the country, in every rank andkindred, took his part, and defended him as its natural patron. In1814, when advised to rely on the higher classes, Napoleon said tothose around him, "Gentlemen, in the situation in which I stand, myonly nobility is the rabble of the Faubourgs."Napoleon met this natural expectation. The necessity of his positionrequired a hospitality to every sort of talent, and its appointmentto trusts; and his feelings went along with this policy. Like everysuperior person, he undoubtedly felt a desire for men and compeers,and a wish to measure his power with other masters, and an impatienceof fools and underlings. In Italy, he sought for men, and found none."Good God!" he said, "how rare men are! There are eighteen millionsin Italy, and I have with difficulty found two,--Dandolo and Melzi."In later years, with larger experience, his respect for mankind wasnot increased. In a moment of bitterness, he said to one of his oldestfriends, "Men deserve the contempt with which they inspire me. I haveonly to put some gold lace on the coat of my virtuous republicans, andthey immediately become just what I wish them." This impatience atlevity was, however, an oblique tribute of respect to those able personswho commanded his regard, not only when he found them friends andcoadjutors, but also when they resisted his will. He could not confoundFox and Pitt, Carnot, Lafayette, and Bernadotte, with the danglers ofhis court; and, in spite of the detraction which his systematic egotismdictated toward the great captains who conquered with and for him,ample acknowledgements are made by him to Lannes Duroc, Kleber, Dessaix,Massena, Murat, Ney, and Augereau. If he felt himself their patron,and founder of their fortunes, as when he said, "I made my generalsout of mud," he could not hide his satisfaction in receiving from thema seconding and support commensurate with the grandeur of hisenterprise. In the Russian campaign, he was so much impressed by thecourage and resources of Marshal Ney, that he said, "I have two hundredmillions in my coffers, and I would give them all for Ney." Thecharacters which he has drawn of several of his marshals arediscriminating, and, though they did not content the insatiable vanityof French officers, are, no doubt, substantially just. And, in fact,every species of merit was sought and advanced under his government."I know," he said, "the depth and draught of water of every one of mygenerals." Natural power was sure to be well received at his court.Seventeen men, in his time, were raised from common soldiers to therank of king, marshal, duke, or general; and the crosses of his Legionof Honor were given to personal valor, and not to family connection."When soldiers have been baptized in the fire of a battle-field, theyhave all one rank in my eyes."When a natural king becomes a titular king, everybody is pleased andsatisfied. The Revolution entitled the strong populace of the FaubourgSt. Antoine, and every horse-boy and powder-monkey in the army, tolook on Napoleon as flesh of his flesh, and the creature of his party:but there is something in the success of grand talent which enlistsan universal sympathy. For, in the prevalence of sense and spirit overstupidity and malversation, all reasonable men have an interest; and,as intellectual beings, we feel the air purified by the electric shock,when material force is overthrown by intellectual energies. As soonas we are removed out of the reach of local and accidental partialities,man feels that Napoleon fights for him; these are honest victories;this strong steam-engine does our work. Whatever appeals to theimagination, by transcending the ordinary limits of human ability,wonderfully encourages and liberates us. This capacious head, revolvingand disposing sovereignly trains of affairs, and animating suchmultitudes of agents; this eye, which looked through Europe; thisprompt invention; this inexhaustible resource;--what events! whatromantic pictures! what strange situations!--when spying the Alps, bya sunset in the Sicilian sea; drawing up his army for battle, in sightof the Pyramids, and saying to his troops, "From the tops of thosepyramids, forty centuries look down on you;" fording the Red Sea;wading in the gulf of the Isthmus of Suez. On the shore of Ptolemais,gigantic projects agitated him. "Had Acre fallen, I should have changedthe face of the world." His army, on the night of the battle ofAusterlitz, which was the anniversary of his inauguration as Emperor,presented him with a bouquet of forty standards taken in the fight.Perhaps it is a little puerile, the pleasure he took in making thesecontrasts glaring; as when he pleased himself with making kings waitin his antechambers, at Tilsit, at Paris, and at Erfurt.We cannot, in the universal imbecility, indecision, and indolence ofmen, sufficiently congratulate ourselves on this strong and readyactor, who took occasion by the beard, and showed us how much may beaccomplished by the mere force of such virtues as all men possess inless degrees; namely, by punctuality, by personal attention, by courage,and thoroughness. "The Austrians," he said, "do not know the value oftime." I should cite him, in his earlier years, as a model of prudence.His power does not consist in any wild or extravagant force; in anyenthusiasm, like Mahomet's; or singular power of persuasion; but inthe exercise of common sense on each emergency, instead of abiding byrules and customs. The lesson he teaches is that which vigor alwaysteaches,--that there is always room for it. To what heaps of cowardlydoubts is not that man's life an answer. When he appeared, it was thebelief of all military men that there could be nothing new in war; asit is the belief of men to-day, that nothing new can be undertaken inpolitics, or in church, or in letters, or in trade, or in farming, orin our social manners and customs; and as it is, at all times, thebelief of society that the world is used up. But Bonaparte knew betterthan society; and, moreover, knew that he knew better. I think all menknow better than they do; know that the institutions we so volublycommend are go-carts and baubles; but they dare not trust theirpresentiments. Bonaparte relied on his own sense, and did not care abean for other people's. The world treated his novelties just as ittreats everybody's novelties,--made infinite objection: mustered allthe impediments; but he snapped his finger at their objections. "Whatcreates great difficulty," he remarks, "in the profession of the landcommander, is the necessity of feeding so many men and animals. If heallows himself to be guided by the commissaries, he will never stir,and all his expeditions will fail." An example of his common sense iswhat he says of the passage of the Alps in winter, which all writers,one repeating after the other, had described as impracticable. "Thewinter," says Napoleon, "is not the most unfavorable season for thepassage of lofty mountains. The snow is then firm, the weather settled,and there is nothing to fear from avalanches, the real and only dangerto be apprehended in the Alps. On those high mountains, there are oftenvery fine days in December, of a dry cold, with extreme calmness inthe air." Read his account, too, of the way in which battles are gained."In all battles, a moment occurs, when the bravest troops, after havingmade the greatest efforts, feel inclined to run. That terror proceedsfrom a want of confidence in their own courage; and it only requiresa slight opportunity, a pretense, to restore confidence to them. Theart is to give rise to the opportunity, and to invent the pretense.At Arcola, I won the battle with twenty-five horsemen. I seized thatmoment of lassitude, gave every man a trumpet, and gained the day withthis handful. You see that two armies are two bodies which meet, andendeavor to frighten each other: a moment of panic occurs, and thatmoment must be turned to advantage. When a man has been present inmany actions, he distinguishes that moment without difficulty; it isas easy as casting up an addition."This deputy of the nineteenth century added to his gifts a capacityfor speculation on general topics. He delighted in running through therange of practical, of literary, and of abstract questions. His opinionis always original, and to the purpose. On the voyage to Egypt, heliked, after dinner, to fix on three or four persons to support aproposition, and as many to oppose it. He gave a subject, and thediscussions turned on questions of religion, the different kinds ofgovernment, and the art of war. One day, he asked, whether the planetswere inhabited? On another, what was the age of the world? Then heproposed to consider the probability of the destruction of the globe,either by water or by fire; at another time, the truth or fallacy ofpresentiments, and the interpretation of dreams. He was very fond oftalking of religion. In 1806, he conversed with Fournier, bishop ofMontpelier, on matters of theology. There were two points on whichthey could not agree, viz., that of hell, and that of salvation outof the pale of the church. The Emperor told Josephine, that he disputedlike a devil on these two points, on which the bishop was inexorable.To the philosophers he readily yielded all that was proved againstreligion as the work of men and time; but he would not hear ofmaterialism. One fine night, on deck, amid a clatter of materialism,Bonaparte pointed to the stars, and said, "You may talk as long as youplease, gentlemen, but who made all that?" He delighted in theconversation of men of science, particularly of Monge and Berthollet;but the men of letters he slighted; "they were manufacturers ofphrases." Of medicine, too, he was fond of talking, and with those ofits practitioners whom he most esteemed,-with Corvisart at Paris, andwith Antonomarchi at St. Helena. "Believe me, "he said to the last,"we had better leave off all these remedies: life is a fortress whichneither you nor I know anything about. Why throw obstacles in the wayof its defense? Its own means are superior to all the apparatus ofyour laboratories. Corvisart candidly agreed with me, that all yourfilthy mixtures are good for nothing. Medicine is a collection ofuncertain prescriptions, the results of which, taken collectively, aremore fatal than useful to mankind. Water, air, and cleanliness, arethe chief articles in my pharmacopeia."His memoirs, dictated to Count Montholon and General Gourgaud, at St.Helena, have great value, after all the deduction that, it seems, isto be made from them, on account of his known disingenuousness. He hasthe goodnature of strength and conscious superiority. I admire hissimple, clear narrative of his battles;--good as Caesar's; hisgood-natured and sufficiently respectful account of Marshal Wurmserand his other antagonists, and his own equality as a writer to hisvarying subject. The most agreeable portion is the Campaign in Egypt.He had hours of thought and wisdom. In intervals of leisure, eitherin the camp or the palace, Napoleon appears as a man of genius,directing on abstract questions the native appetite for truth, and theimpatience of words, he was wont to show in war. He could enjoy everyplay of invention, a romance, a _bon mot_, as well as a stratagemin a campaign. He delighted to fascinate Josephine and her ladies, ina dim-lighted apartment, by the terrors of a fiction, to which hisvoice and dramatic power lent every addition.I call Napoleon the agent or attorney of the middle class of modernsociety; of the throng who fill the markets, shops, counting-houses,manufactories, ships, of the modern world, aiming to be rich. He wasthe agitator, the destroyer of prescription, the internal improver,the liberal, the radical, the inventor of means, the opener of doorsand markets, the subverter of monopoly and abuse. Of course, the richand aristocratic did not like him. England, the center of capital, andRome and Austria, centers of tradition and genealogy, opposed him. Theconsternation of the dull and conservative classes, the terror of thefoolish old men and old women of the Roman conclave,--who in theirdespair took hold of anything, and would cling to red-hot iron,--thevain attempts of statists to amuse and deceive him, of the emperor ofAustria to bribe him; and the instinct of the young, ardent, and activemen, everywhere, which pointed him out as the giant of the middleclass, make his history bright and commanding. He had the virtues ofthe masses of his constituents; he had also their vices. I am sorrythat the brilliant picture has its reverse. But that is the fatalquality which we discover in our pursuit of wealth, that it istreacherous, and is bought by the breaking or weakening of thesentiments; and it is inevitable that we should find the same fact inthe history of this champion, who proposed to himself simply a brilliantcareer, without any stipulation or scruple concerning the means.Bonaparte was singularly destitute of generous sentiments. Thehighest-placed individual in the most cultivated age and populationof the world,--he has not the merit of common truth and honesty. Heis unjust to his generals; egotistic, and monopolizing; meanly stealingthe credit of their great actions from Kellermann, from Bernadotte;intriguing to involve his faithful Junot in hopeless bankruptcy, inorder to drive him to a distance from Paris, because the familiarityof his manners offends the new pride of his throne. He is a boundlessliar. The official paper, his "Moniteurs," and all his bulletins, areproverbs for saying what he wished to be believed; and worse,--he sat,in his premature old age, in his lonely island, coldly falsifyingfacts, and dates, and characters, and giving to history, a theatricaleclat. Like all Frenchmen, he has a passion for stage effect. Everyaction that breathes of generosity is poisoned by this calculation.His star, his love of glory, his doctrine of the immortality of thesoul, are all French. "I must dazzle and astonish. If I were to givethe liberty of the press, my power could not last three days." To makea great noise is his favorite design. "A great reputation is a greatnoise; the more there is made, the farther off it is heard. Laws,institutions, monuments, nations, all fall; but the noise continues,and resounds in after ages." His doctrine of immortality is simplyfame. His theory of influence is not flattering. "There are two leversfor moving men,--interest and fear. Love is a silly infatuation, dependupon it. Friendship is but a name. I love nobody. I do not even lovemy brothers; perhaps Joseph, a little, from habit, and because he ismy elder; and Duroc, I love him too; but why?--because his characterpleases me; he is stern and resolute, and, I believe, the fellow nevershed a tear. For my part, I know very well that I have no true friends.As long as I continue to be what I am, I may have as many pretendedfriends as I please. Leave sensibility to women; but men should befirm in heart and purpose, or they should have nothing to do with warand government." He was thoroughly unscrupulous. He would steal,slander, assassinate, drown, and poison, as his interest dictated. Hehad no generosity; but mere vulgar hatred; he was intensely selfish;he was perfidious; he cheated at cards; he was a prodigious gossip;and opened letters; and delighted in his infamous police; and rubbedhis hands with joy when he had intercepted some morsel of intelligenceconcerning the men and women about him, boasting that "he kneweverything;" and interfered with the cutting the dresses of the women;and listened after the hurrahs and the compliments of the street,incognito. His manners were coarse. He treated women with lowfamiliarity. He had the habit of pulling their ears and pinching theircheeks, when he was in good humor, and of pulling the ears and whiskersof men, and of striking and horse-play with them, to his last days.It does not appear that he listened at keyholes, or, at least, thathe "was caught at it". In short, when you have penetrated through allthe circles of power and splendor, you were not dealing with agentleman, at last; but with an impostor and a rogue; and he fullydeserves the epithet of Jupiter Scapin, or a sort of Scamp Jupiter.In describing the two parties into which modern society dividesitself,--the democrat and the conservative,--I said, Bonaparterepresents the democrat, or the party of men of business, against thestationary or conservative party. I omitted then to say, what ismaterial to the statement, namely, that these two parties differ onlyas young and old. The democrat is a young conservative; the conservativeis an old democrat. The aristocrat is the democrat ripe, and gone toseed,--because both parties stand on the one ground of the supremevalue of property, which one endeavors to get, and the other to keep.Bonaparte may be said to represent the whole history of this party,its youth and its age; yes, and with poetic justice, its fate, in hisown. The counter-revolution, the counter-party, still waits for itsorgan and representative, in a lover and a man of truly public anduniversal aims.Here was an experiment, under the most favorable conditions, of thepowers of intellect without conscience. Never was such a leader soendowed, and so weaponed; never leader found such aids and followers.And what was the result of this vast talent and power, of these immensearmies, burned cities, squandered treasures, immolated millions ofmen, of this demoralized Europe? It came to no result. All passed away,like the smoke of his artillery and left no trace. He left Francesmaller, poorer, feebler, than he found it; and the whole contest forfreedom was to be begun again. The attempt was, in principle, suicidal.France served him with life, and limb, and estate, as long as it couldidentify its interest with him; but when men saw that after victorywas another war; after the destruction of armies, new conscriptions;and they who had toiled so desperately were never nearer to thereward,--they could not spend what they had earned, nor repose on theirdown-beds, nor strut in their chateaux,--they deserted him. Men foundthat his absorbing egotism was deadly to all other men. It resembledthe torpedo, which inflicts a succession of shocks on any one who takeshold of it, producing spasms which contract the muscles of the hand,so that the man cannot open his fingers; and the animal inflicts newand more violent shocks, until he paralyzes and kills his victim. So,this exorbitant egotist narrowed, impoverished, and absorbed the powerand existence of those who served him; and the universal cry of France,and of Europe, in 1814, was, "enough of him;" "assez de Bonaparte."It was not Bonaparte's fault. He did all that in him lay, to live andthrive without moral principle. It was the nature of things, the eternallaw of man and of the world, which baulked and ruined him; and theresult, in a million experiments, will be the same. Every experiment,by multitudes or by individuals, that has a sensual and selfish aim,will fail. The pacific Fourier will be as inefficient as the perniciousNapoleon. As long as our civilization is essentially one of property,of fences, of exclusiveness, it will be mocked by delusions. Our richeswill leave us sick; there will be bitterness in our laughter; and ourwine will burn our mouth. Only that good profits, which we can tastewith all doors open, and which serves all men.VII. GOETHE; OR, THE WRITERI find a provision in the constitution of the world for the writer orsecretary, who is to report the doings of the miraculous spirit oflife that everywhere throbs and works. His office is a reception ofthe facts into the mind, and then a selection of the eminent andcharacteristic experiences.Nature will be reported. All things are engaged in writing theirhistory. The planet, the pebble, goes attended by its shadow. Therolling rock leaves its scratches on the mountain; the river, itschannel in the soil; the animal, its bones in the stratum; the fernand leaf their modest epitaph in the coal. The falling drop makes itssculpture in the sand or the stone. Not a foot steps into the snow,or along the ground, but prints in characters more or less lasting,a map of its march. Every act of the man inscribes itself in thememories of his fellows, and in his own manners and face. The air isfull of sounds; the sky, of tokens; the ground is all memoranda andsignatures; and every object covered over with hints, which speak tothe intelligent.In nature, this self-registration is incessant, and the narrative isthe print of the seal. It neither exceeds nor comes short of the fact.But nature strives upward; and, in man, the report is something morethan print of the seal. It is a new and finer form of the original.The record is alive, as that which it recorded is alive. In man, thememory is a kind of looking-glass, which, having received the imagesof surrounding objects, is touched with life, and disposes them in anew order. The facts which transpired do not lie in it inert; but somesubside, and others shine; so that soon we have a new picture, composedof the eminent experiences. The man cooperates. He loves to communicate;and that which is for him to say lies as a load on his heart until itis delivered. But, besides the universal joy of conversation, some menare born with exalted powers for this second creation. Men are bornto write. The gardener saves every slip, and seed, and peach-stone;his vocation is to be a planter of plants. Not less does the writerattend his affairs. Whatever he beholds or experiences, comes to himas a model, and sits for its picture. He counts it all nonsense thatthey say, that some things are undescribable. He believes that allthat can be thought can be written, first or last; and he would reportthe Holy Ghost, or attempt it. Nothing so broad, so subtle, or so dear,but comes therefore commended to his pen,--and he will write. In hiseyes, a man is the faculty of reporting, and the universe is thepossibility of being reported. In conversation, in calamity, he findsnew materials; as our German poet said, "some god gave me the powerto paint what I suffer." He draws his rents from rage and pain. Byacting rashly, he buys the power of talking wisely. Vexations, and atempest of passion, only fill his sails; as the good Luther writes,"When I am angry I can pray well, and preach well;" and if we knew thegenesis of fine-strokes of eloquence, they might recall the complaisanceof Sultan Amurath, who struck off some Persian heads, that hisphysician, Vesalius, might see the spasms in the muscles of the neck.His failures are the preparation of his victories. A new thought, ora crisis of passion, apprises him that all that he has yet learned andwritten is exoteric--is not the fact, but some rumor of the fact. Whatthen? Does he throw away the pen? No; he begins again to describe inthe new light which has shined on him,--if, by some means, he may yetsave some true word. Nature conspires. Whatever can be thought can bespoken, and still rises for utterance, though to rude and stammeringorgans. If they cannot compass it, it waits and works, until, at last,it moulds them to its perfect will, and is articulated.This striving after imitative expression, which one meets everywhere,is significant of the aim of nature, but is mere stenography. Thereare higher degrees, and nature has more splendid endowments for thosewhom she elects to a superior office; for the class of scholars orwriters, who see connection where the multitude see fragments, and whoare impelled to exhibit the facts in order, and so to supply the axison which the frame of things turns. Nature has dearly at heart theformation of the speculative man, or scholar. It is an end never lostsight of, and is prepared in the original casting of things. He is nopermissive or accidental appearance, but an organic agent, one of theestates of the realm, provided and prepared from of old and fromeverlasting, in the knitting and contexture of things. Presentiments,impulses, cheer him. There is a certain heat in the breast, whichattends the perception of a primary truth, which is the shining of thespiritual sun down into the shaft of the mine. Every thought whichdawns on the mind, in the moment of its emergency announces its ownrank,--whether it is some whimsy, or whether it is a power.If he have his incitements, there is, on the other side, invitationand need enough of his gift. Society has, at all times, the same want,namely, of one sane man with adequate powers of expression to held upeach object of monomania in its right relation. The ambitious andmercenary bring their last new mumbo-jumbo, whether tariff, Texas,railroad, Romanism, mesmerism, or California; and, by detaching theobject from its relations, easily succeed in making it seen in a glare;and a multitude go mad about it, and they are not to be reproved orcured by the opposite multitude, who are kept from this particularinsanity by an equal frenzy on another crochet. But let one man havethe comprehensive eye that can replace this isolated prodigy in itsright neighborhood and bearings,--the illusion vanishes, and thereturning reason of the community thanks the reason of the monitor.The scholar is the man of the ages, but he must also wish, with othermen, to stand well with his contemporaries. But there is a certainridicule, among superficial people, thrown on the scholars or clerisy,which is of no import, unless the scholars heed it. In this country,the emphasis of conversation, and of public opinion, commends thepractical man; and the solid portion of the community is named withsignificant respect in every circle. Our people are of Bonaparte'sopinion concerning ideologists. Ideas are subversive of social orderand comfort, and at last make a fool of the possessor. It is believed,the ordering a cargo of goods from New York to Smyrna; or, the runningup and down to procure a company of subscribers to set a-going fiveor ten thousand spindles; or, the negotiations of a caucus, and thepractising on the prejudices and facility of country-people, to securetheir votes in November,--is practical and commendable.If I were to compare action of a much higher strain with a life ofcontemplation, I should not venture to pronounce with much confidencein favor of the former. Mankind have such a deep stake in inwardillumination, that there is much to be said by the hermit or monk indefense of his life of thought and prayer. A certain partiality, aheadiness, and loss of balance, is the tax which all action must pay.Act, if you like,--but you do it at your peril. Men's actions are toostrong for them. Show me a man who has acted, and who has not been thevictim and slave of his action. What they have done commits and enforcesthem to do the same again. The first act, which was to be an experiment,becomes a sacrament. The fiery reformer embodies his aspiration insome rite or covenant, and he and his friends cleave to the form andlose the aspiration. The Quaker has established Quakerism, the Shakerhas established his monastery and his dance; and, although each pratesof spirit, there is no spirit, but repetition, which is anti-spiritual.But where are his new things of today? In actions of enthusiasm, thisdrawback appears: but in those lower activities, which have no higheraim than to make us more comfortable and more cowardly, in actions ofcunning, actions that steal and lie, actions that divorce thespeculative from the practical faculty, and put a ban on reason andsentiment, there is nothing else but drawback and negation. The Hindooswrite in their sacred books, "Children only, and not the learned, speakof the speculative and the practical faculties as two. They are butone, for both obtain the selfsame end, and the place which is gainedby the followers of the one is gained by the followers of the other.That man seeth, who seeth that the speculative and the practicaldoctrines are one." For great action must draw on the spiritual nature.The measure of action is the sentiment from which it proceeds. Thegreatest action may easily be one of the most private circumstances.This disparagement will not come from the leaders, but from inferiorpersons. The robust gentlemen who stand at the head of the practicalclass, share the ideas of the time, and have too much sympathy withthe speculative class. It is not from men excellent in any kind, thatdisparagement of any other is to be looked for. With such, Talleyrand'squestion is ever the main one; not, is he rich? is he committed? ishe well-meaning? has he this or that faculty? is he of the movement?is he of the establishment?--but, Is he anybody? does he stand forsomething? He must be good of his kind. That is all that Talleyrand,all that State-street, all that the common sense of mankind asks. Bereal and admirable, not as we know, but as you know. Able men do notcare in what kind a man is able, so only that he is able. A masterlikes a master, and does not stipulate whether it be orator, artist,craftsman, or king.Society has really no graver interest than the well-being of theliterary class. And it is not to be denied that men are cordial intheir recognition and welcome of intellectual accomplishments. Stillthe writer does not stand with us on any commanding ground. I thinkthis to be his own fault. A pound passes for a pound. There have beentimes when he was a sacred person; he wrote Bibles; the first hymns;the codes; the epics; tragic songs; Sibylline verses; Chaldean oracles;Laconian sentences inscribed on temple walls. Every word was true, andwoke the nations to new life. He wrote without levity, and withoutchoice. Every word was carved, before his eyes, into the earth andsky; and the sun and stars were only letters of the same purport; andof no more necessity. But how can he be honored, when he does not honorhimself; when he loses himself in the crowd; when he is no longer thelawgiver, but the sycophant, ducking to the giddy opinion of a recklesspublic; when he must sustain with shameless advocacy some badgovernment, or must bark, all the year round, in opposition; or writeconventional criticism, or profligate novels; or, at any rate, writewithout thought, and without recurrence, by day and night, to thesources of inspiration?Some reply to these questions may be furnished by looking over thelist of men of literary genius in our age. Among these, no moreinstructive name occurs than that of Goethe, to represent the powerand duties of the scholar or writer.I described Bonaparte as a representative of the popular external lifeand aims of the nineteenth century. Its other half, its poet, is Goethe,a man quite domesticated in the century, breathing its air, enjoyingits fruits, impossible at any earlier time, and taking away, by hiscolossal parts, the reproach of weakness, which, but for him, wouldlie on the intellectual works of the period. He appears at a time whena general culture has spread itself, and has smoothed down all sharpindividual traits; when, in the absence of heroic characters, a socialcomfort and cooperation have come in. There is no poet, but scores ofpoetic writers; no Columbus, but hundreds of post-captains, withtransit-telescope, barometer, and concentrated soup and pemmican; noDemosthenes, no Chatham, but any number of clever parliamentary andforensic debaters; no prophet or saint, but colleges of divinity; nolearned man, but learned societies, a cheap press, reading-rooms, andbook-clubs, without number. There was never such a miscellany of facts.The world extends itself like American trade. We conceive Greek orRoman life,--life in the middle ages--to be a simple and comprehensiveaffair; but modern life to respect a multitude of things, which isdistracting.Goethe was the philosopher of this multiplicity; hundred-handed,Argus-eyed, able and happy to cope with this rolling miscellany offacts and sciences, and, by his own versatility, to dispose of themwith ease; a manly mind, unembarrassed by the variety of coats ofconvention with which life had got encrusted, easily able by hissubtlety to pierce these, and to draw his strength from nature, withwhich he lived in full communion. What is strange, too, he lived ina small town, in a petty state, in a defeated state, and in a timewhen Germany played no such leading part in the world's affairs as toswell the bosom of her sons with any metropolitan pride, such as mighthave cheered a French, or English, or, once, a Roman or Attic genius.Yet there is no trace of provincial limitation in his muse. He is nota debtor to his position, but was born with a free and controllinggenius.The Helena, or the second part of Faust, is a philosophy of literatureset in poetry; the work of one who found himself the master ofhistories, mythologies, philosophies, sciences, and nationalliteratures, in the encyclopaedical manner in which modern erudition,with its international intercourse of the whole earth's population,researches into Indian, Etruscan, and all Cyclopaean arts, geology,chemistry, astronomy; and every one of these kingdoms assuming a certainaerial and poetic character, by reason of the multitude. One looks ata king with reverence; but if one should chance to be at a congressof kings, the eye would take liberties with the peculiarities of each.These are not wild miraculous songs, but elaborate forms, to which thepoet has confided the results of eighty years of observation. Thisreflective and critical wisdom makes the poem more truly the flowerof this time. It dates itself. Still he is a poet,--poet of a prouderlaurel than any contemporary, and under this plague of microscopes(for he seems to see out of every pore of his skin), strikes the harpwith a hero's strength and grace.The wonder of the book is its superior intelligence. In the menstruumof this man's wit, the past and the present ages, and their religions,politics, and modes of thinking, are dissolved into archetypes andideas. What new mythologies sail through his head! The Greeks said,that Alexander went as far as Chaos; Goethe went, only the other day,as far; and one step farther he hazarded, and brought himself safeback. There is a heart-cheering freedom in his speculation. The immensehorizon which journeys with us lends its majesties to trifles, and tomatters of convenience and necessity, as to solemn and festalperformances. He was the soul of his century. If that was learned, andhad become, by population, compact organization, and drill of parts,one great Exploring Expedition, accumulating a glut of facts and fruitstoo fast for any hitherto-existing savants to classify, this man'smind had ample chambers for the distribution of all. He had a powerto unite the detached atoms again by their own law. He has clothed ourmodern existence with poetry. Amid littleness and detail, he detectedthe Genius of life, the old cunning Proteus, nestling close beside us,and showed that the dullness and prose we ascribe to the age was onlyanother of his masks:--"His very flight is presence in disguise:" thathe had put off a gay uniform for a fatigue dress, and was not a whitless vivacious or rich in Liverpool or the Hague, than once in Romeor Antioch. He sought him in public squares and main streets, inboulevards and hotels; and, in the solidest kingdom of routine and thesenses, he showed the lurking daemonic power; that, in actions ofroutine, a thread of mythology and fable spins itself; and this, bytracing the pedigree of every usage and practice, every institution,utensil, and means, home to its origin in the structure of man. He hadan extreme impatience of conjecture, and of rhetoric. "I have guessesenough of my own; if a man write a book, let him set down only whathe knows." He writes in the plainest and lowest tone, omitting a greatdeal more than he writes, and putting ever a thing for a word. He hasexplained the distinction between the antique and the modern spiritand art. He has defined art, its scope and laws. He has said the bestthings about nature that ever were said. He treats nature as the oldphilosophers, as the seven wise masters did,--and, with whatever lossof French tabulation and dissection, poetry and humanity remain to us;and they have some doctorial skill. Eyes are better, on the whole,than telescopes or microscopes. He has contributed a key to many partsof nature, through the rare turn for unity and simplicity in his mind.Thus Goethe suggested the leading idea of modern botany, that a leaf,or the eye of a leaf, is the unit of botany, and that every part ofthe plant is only a transformed leaf to meet a new condition; and, byvarying the conditions, a leaf may be converted into any other organ,and any other organ into a leaf. In like manner, in osteology, heassumed that one vertebra of the spine might be considered the unitof the skeleton; the head was only the uppermost vertebra transformed."The plant goes from knot to knot, closing, at last, with the flowerand the seed. So the tape-worm, the caterpillar, goes from knot toknot, and closes with the head. Men and the higher animals are builtup through the vertebrae, the powers being concentrated in the head."In optics, again, he rejected the artificial theory of seven colors,and considered that every color was the mixture of light and darknessin new proportions. It is really of very little consequence what topiche writes upon. He sees at every pore, and has a certain gravitationtoward truth. He will realize what you say. He hates to be trifledwith, and to be made to say over again some old wife's fable, that hashad possession of men's faith these thousand years. He may as well seeif it is true as another. He sifts it. I am here, he would say, to bethe measure and judge of these things. Why should I take them on trust?And, therefore, what he says of religion, of passion, of marriage, ofmanners, property, of paper money, of periods or beliefs, of omens,of luck, or whatever else, refuses to be forgotten.Take the most remarkable example that could occur of this tendency toverify every term in popular use. The Devil had played an importantpart in mythology in all times. Goethe would have no word that doesnot cover a thing. The same measure will still serve: "I have neverheard of any crime which I might not have committed." So he flies atthe throat of this imp. He shall be real; he shall be modern; he shallbe European; he shall dress like a gentleman, and accept the manner,and walk in the streets, and be well initiated in the life of Vienna,and of Heidelberg, in 1820,--or he shall not exist. Accordingly, hestripped him of mythologic gear, of horns, cloven foot, harpoon tail,brimstone, and blue-fire, and, instead of looking in books and pictures,looked for him in his own mind, in every shade of coldness, selfishness,and unbelief that, in crowds, or in solitude, darkens over the humanthought,--and found that the portrait gained reality and terror byeverything he added, and by everything he took away. He found that theessence of this hobgoblin, which had hovered in shadow about thehabitations of men, ever since they were men, was pure intellect,applied,--as always there is a tendency,--to the service of the senses:and he flung into literature, in his Mephistopheles, the first organicfigure that has been added for some ages, and which will remain aslong as the Prometheus. I have no design to enter into any analysisof his numerous works. They consist of translations, criticisms, dramas,lyric and every other description of poems, literary journals, andportraits of distinguished men. Yet I cannot omit to specify the WilhelmMeister.Wilhelm Meister is a novel in every sense, the first of its kind,called by its admirers the only delineation of modern society,--as ifother novels, those of Scott, for example, dealt with costume andcondition, this with the spirit of life. It is a book over which someveil is still drawn. It is read by very intelligent persons with wonderand delight. It is preferred by some such to Hamlet, as a work ofgenius. I suppose no book of this century can compare with it in itsdelicious sweetness, so new, so provoking to the mind, gratifying itwith so many and so solid thoughts, just insights into life, andmanners, and characters; so many good hints for the conduct of life,so many unexpected glimpses into a higher sphere, and never a traceof rhetoric or dullness. A very provoking book to the curiosity ofyoung men of genius, but a very unsatisfactory one. Lovers of lightreading, those who look in it for the entertainment they find in aromance, are disappointed. On the other hand, those who begin it withthe higher hope to read in it a worthy history of genius, and the justaward of the laurels to its toils and denials, have also reason tocomplain. We had an English romance here, not long ago, professing toembody the hope of a new age, and to unfold the political hope of theparty called "Young England," in which the only reward of virtue isa seat in parliament, and a peerage. Goethe's romance has a conclusionas lame and immoral. George Sand, in Consuelo and its continuation,has sketched a truer and more dignified picture. In the progress ofthe story, the characters of the hero and heroine expand at a ratethat shivers the porcelain chess-table of aristocratic convention:they quit the society and habits of their rank; they lose their wealth;they become the servants of great ideas, and of the most generoussocial ends; until, at last, the hero, who is the center and fountainof an association for the rendering of the noblest benefits to thehuman race, no longer answers to his own titled name: it sounds foreignand remote in his ear."I am only man," he says; "I breathe and work for man," and this inpoverty and extreme sacrifices. Goethe's hero, on the contrary, hasso many weaknesses and impurities, and keeps such bad company, thatthe sober English public, when the book was translated, were disgusted.And yet it is so crammed with wisdom, with knowledge of the world, andwith knowledge of laws; the persons so truly and subtly drawn, andwith such few strokes, and not a word too much, the book remains everso new and unexhausted, that we must even let it go its way, and bewilling to get what good from it we can, assured that it has only begunits office, and has millions of readers yet to serve.The argument is the passage of a democrat to the aristocracy, usingboth words in their best sense. And this passage is not made in anymean or creeping way, but through the hall door. Nature and characterassist, and the rank is made real by sense and probity in the nobles.No generous youth can escape this charm of reality in the book, sothat it is highly stimulating to intellect and courage. The ardent andholy Novalis characterized the book as "thoroughly modern and prosaic;the romantic is completely leveled in it; so is the poetry of nature;the wonderful. The book treats only of the ordinary affairs of men:it is a poeticized civic and domestic story. The wonderful in it isexpressly treated as fiction and enthusiastic dreaming:"--and yet,what is also characteristic, Novalis soon returned to this book, andit remained his favorite reading to the end of his life.What distinguishes Goethe for French and English readers, is a propertywhich he shares with his nation,--a habitual reference to interiortruth. In England and in America there is a respect for talent; and,if it is exerted in support of any ascertained or intelligible interestor party, or in regular opposition to any, the public is satisfied.In France, there is even a greater delight in intellectual brilliancy,for its own sake. And, in all these countries, men of talent writefrom talent. It is enough if the understanding is occupied, the tastepropitiated,--so many columns so many hours, filled in a lively andcreditable way. The German intellect wants the French sprightliness,the fine practical understanding of the English, and the Americanadventure; but it has a certain probity, which never rests in asuperficial performance, but asks steadily, To what end? A Germanpublic asks for a controlling sincerity. Here is activity of thought;but what is it for? What does the man mean? Whence, whence, all thesethoughts?Talent alone cannot make a writer. There must be a man behind the book;a personality which, by birth and quality, is pledged to the doctrinesthere set forth, and which exists to see and state things so, and nototherwise; holding things because they are things. If he cannot rightlyexpress himself to-day, the same things subsist, and will openthemselves to-morrow. There lies the burden on his mind--the burdenof truth to be declared,--more or less understood; and it constituteshis business and calling in the world, to see those facts through, andto make them known. What signifies that he trips and stammers; thathis voice is harsh or hissing; that this method or his tropes areinadequate? That message will find method and imagery, articulationand melody. Though he were dumb, it would speak. If not,--if there beno such God's word in the man,--what care we how adroit, how fluent,how brilliant he is?It makes a great difference to the force of any sentence, whether therebe a man behind it, or no. In the learned journal, in the influentialnewspaper, I discern no form; only some irresponsible shadow; oftenersome monied corporation, or some dangler, who hopes, in the mask androbes of his paragraph, to pass for somebody. But, through every clauseand part of speech of a right book, I meet the eyes of the mostdetermined of men: his force and terror inundate every word: the commasand dashes are alive; so that the writing is athletic and nimble,--cango far and live long.In England and America, one may be an adept in the writing of a Greekor Latin poet, without any poetic taste or fire. That a man has spentyears on Plato and Proclus, does not afford a presumption that he holdsheroic opinions, or undervalues the fashions of his town. But theGerman nation have the most ridiculous good faith on these subjects:the student, out of the lecture-room, still broods on the lessons; andthe professor cannot divest himself of the fancy, that the truths ofphilosophy have some application to Berlin and Munich. This earnestnessenables them to out-see men of much more talent. Hence, almost all thevaluable distinctions which are current in higher conversation, havebeen derived to us from Germany. But, whilst men distinguished for witand learning, in England and France, adopt their study and their sidewith a certain levity, and are not understood to be very deeply engaged,from grounds of character, to the topic or the part theyespouse,--Goethe, the head and body of the German nation, does notspeak from talent, but the truth shines through: he is very wise,though his talent often veils his wisdom. However excellent his sentenceis, he has somewhat better in view. It awakens my curiosity. He hasthe formidable independence which converse with truth gives: hear you,or forbear, his fact abides; and your interest in the writer is notconfined to his story, and he dismissed from memory, when he hasperformed his task creditably, as a baker when he has left his loaf;but his work is the least part of him. The old Eternal Genius who builtthe world has confided himself more to this man than to any other. Idare not say that Goethe ascended to the highest grounds from whichgenius has spoken. He has not worshipped the highest unity; he isincapable of a self-surrender to the moral sentiment. There are noblerstrains in poetry than any he has sounded. There are writers poorerin talent, whose tone is purer, and more touches the heart. Goethe cannever be dear to men. His is not even the devotion to pure truth; butto truth for the sake of culture. He has no aims less large than theconquest of universal nature, of universal truth, to be his portion;a man not to be bribed, nor deceived, nor overawed; of a stoical self-command and self-denial, and having one test for all men,--What canyou teach me? All possessions are valued by him for that only; rank,privileges, health, time, being itself.He is the type of culture, the amateur of all arts, and sciences, andevents; artistic, but not artist; spiritual, but not spiritualist.There is nothing he had not right to know; there is no weapon in thearmy of universal genius he did not take into his hand, but withperemptory heed that he should not be for a moment prejudiced by hisinstruments. He lays a ray of light under every fact, and betweenhimself and his dearest property. From him nothing was hid, nothingwithholden. The lurking daemons sat to him, and the saint who saw thedaemons; and the metaphysical elements took form. "Piety itself is noaim, but only a means whereby, through purest inward peace, we mayattain to highest culture." And his penetration of every secret of thefine arts will make Goethe still more statuesque. His affections helphim, like women employed by Cicero to worm out the secret ofconspirators. Enmities he has none. Enemy of him you may be,--if soyou shall teach him aught which your good-will cannot,--were it onlywhat experience will accrue from your ruin. Enemy and welcome, butenemy on high terms. He cannot hate anybody; his time is worth toomuch. Temperamental antagonisms may be suffered, but like feuds ofemperors, who fight dignifiedly across kingdoms.His autobiography, under the title of "Poetry and Truth Out of MyLife," is the expression of the idea,--now familiar to the world throughthe German mind, but a novelty to England, Old and New, when that bookappeared,--that a man exists for culture; not for what he canaccomplish, but for what can be accomplished in him. The reaction ofthings on the man is the only noteworthy result. An intellectual mancan see himself as a third person; therefore his faults and delusionsinterest him equally with his successes. Though he wishes to prosperin affairs, he wishes more to know the history and destiny of man;whilst the clouds of egotists drifting about him are only interestedin a low success. This idea reigns in the _Dichtung und Wahrheit_,and directs the selection of the incidents; and nowise the externalimportance of events, the rank of the personages, or the bulk ofincomes. Of course, the book affords slender materials for what wouldbe reckoned with us a "Life of Goethe;"--few dates; no correspondence;no details of offices or employments; no light on his marriage; and,a period of ten years, that should be the most active in his life,after his settlement at Weimar, is sunk in silence. Meantime, certainlove-affairs, that came to nothing, as people say, have the strangestimportance: he crowds us with detail:--certain whimsical opinions,cosmogonies, and religions of his own invention, and, especially hisrelations to remarkable minds, and to critical epochs of thought:--thesehe magnifies. His "Daily and Yearly Journal," his "Italian Travels,"his "Campaign in France" and the historical part of his "Theory ofColors," have the same interest. In the last, he rapidly notices Kepler,Roger Bacon, Galileo, Newton, Voltaire, etc.; and the charm of thisportion of the book consists in the simplest statement of the relationbetwixt these grandees of European scientific history and himself; themere drawing of the lines from Goethe to Kepler, from Goethe to Bacon,from Goethe to Newton. The drawing of the line is for the time andperson, a solution of the formidable problem, and gives pleasure whenIphigenia and Faust do not, without any cost of invention comparableto that of Iphigenia and Faust. This law giver of art is not an artist.Was it that he knew too much, that his sight was microscopic, andinterfered with the just perspective, the seeing of the whole? He isfragmentary; a writer of occasional poems, and of an encyclopaedia ofsentences. When he sits down to write a drama or a tale, he collectsand sorts his observations from a hundred sides, and combines theminto the body as fitly as he can. A great deal refuses to incorporate:this he adds loosely, as letters, of the parties, leaves from theirjournals, or the like. A great deal still is left that will not findany place. This the bookbinder alone can give any cohesion to: and,hence, notwithstanding the looseness of many of his works, we havevolumes of detached paragraphs, aphorisms, xenien, etc.I suppose the worldly tone of his tales grew out of the calculationsof self-culture. It was the infirmity of an admirable scholar, wholoved the world out of gratitude; who knew where libraries, galleries,architecture, laboratories, savants, and leisure, were to be had, andwho did not quite trust the compensations of poverty and nakedness.Socrates loved Athens; Montaigne, Paris; and Madame de Stael said, shewas only vulnerable on that side (namely, of Paris). It has itsfavorable aspect. All the geniuses are usually so ill-assorted andsickly, that one is ever wishing them somewhere else. We seldom seeanybody who is not uneasy or afraid to live. There is a slight blushof shame on the cheek of good men and aspiring men, and a spice ofcaricature. But this man was entirely at home and happy in his centuryand the world. None was so fit to live, or more heartily enjoyed thegame. In this aim of culture, which is the genius of his works, istheir power. The idea of absolute, eternal truth, without referenceto my own enlargement by it, is higher. The surrender to the torrent,of poetic inspiration is higher; but compared with any motives on whichbooks are written in England and America, this is very truth, and hasthe power to inspire which belongs to truth. Thus has he brought backto a book some of its ancient might and dignity.Goethe, coming into an over-civilized time and country, when originaltalent was oppressed under the load of books, and mechanicalauxiliaries, and the distracting variety of claims, taught men how todispose of this mountainous miscellany, and make it subservient. Ijoin Napoleon with him, as being both representatives of the impatienceand reaction of nature against the morgue of conventions,--two sternrealists, who, with their scholars, have severally set the axe at theroot of the tree of cant and seeming, for this time, and for all time.This cheerful laborer, with no external popularity or provocation,drawing his motive and his plan from his own breast, tasked himselfwith stints for a giant, and, without relaxation or rest, except byalternating his pursuits, worked on for eighty years with the steadinessof his first zeal.It is the last lesson of modern science, that the highest simplicityof structure is produced, not by few elements, but by the highestcomplexity. Man is the most composite of all creatures: thewheel-insect, volvox globator, is at the other extreme. We shall learnto draw rents and revenues from the immense patrimony of the old andrecent ages. Goethe teaches courage, and the equivalence of all times:that the disadvantages of any epoch exist only to the faint-hearted.Genius hovers with his sunshine and music close by the darkest anddeafest eras. No mortgage, no attainder, will hold on men or hours.The world is young; the former great men call to us affectionately.We too must write Bibles, to unite again the heavens and the earthlyworld. The secret of genius is to suffer no fiction to exist for us;to realize all that we know; in the high refinement of modern life,in arts, in sciences, in books, in men, to exact good faith, reality,and a purpose; and first, last, midst, and without end, to honor everytruth by use.
